AI010 702

Computerised Process Control (Common to EI010 702)

Teaching scheme Credits: 4 2 hours lecture and 2 hour tutorial per week


Objective:

•	To provide a detailed view of the implementation of SCADA in process industry. 

•	To give an insight about Instrumented Safety Systems and Programmable Logic controllers with applications using ladder programming. 
•	To teach about different digital controllers using z transforms. 

•	To impart knowledge about Distributed Control System and its architecture. 

•	To have an insight into Electrical Safety and Process Safety Management. 

Module 1

Introduction to computer control of process- need for computers in control system –block diagram of a computer control system- multi channel data acquisition system(DAS)

Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition System (SCADA) :Concepts- SCADA development from Telemetry, SCADA System Hardware, Remote Terminal Units (RTUs), Master Terminal Units, Communication philosophies, Communication Interface and Communication Protocols, Configuring Simple applications, Operator Interfacing and Applications of SCADA.

Module 2

Programmable Logic Controllers: Introduction to Instrumented Safety Systems and Safety Integrity Levels, Sequential and Combinational Control, Microprocessor Based Programmable Logic Controllers - Architecture, I/O Modules, Isolators, PLC Programming Languages, PLC ladder programming : Programming On-Off inputs to produce on – off outputs, Concept of Redundancy and Triple Modular Redundant PLCs, PLC Installation and Testing.

Module 3

Digital controllers: Design of Control algorithms using Z transforms – Dead beat algorithm – Dahlin’s method –Ringing – Kalman’s approach – Digital PID algorithms – Position and velocity form . Modified Z transforms to system with dead time –Smith predictor algorithm. Internal model control using Z transform.

Module 4

DCS Basic Packages: Introduction to Centralized & De-centralized Control, Direct Digital Control and Distributed Process Control, DCS Architecture, Local Control Units, DCS Configuration with associated accessories, I/O Hardware, Multiplexers, A/D and D/A Converters, Set Point Stations, DCS Flow sheet Symbols. Redundancy Concepts, Data Highways,Field Buses, CRT Displays, Man Machine Interface, Operator Stations, Engineer’ Stations, System Integration with PLC, SCADA and Computers, OPC Connectivity.

Module 5
 
Electrical safety: NEMA standards, grounding and shielding – standards , power grounding, concept of shielding, electro static instrument shielding . Process safety management: elements of process safety management- process safety information – process hazard analysis .



Reference Books

1.	Stuart A.Boyer “Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition 

2.	Jeff Weigunt. “Creating HMI/ SCADA Industrial Applications using Microsoft Access”, ISA. 
3.	RJ.Willam, “Hand book of SCADA System for the Oil and Gas Industry”, Mold Clwyd. 
4.	Considine, Applications of Computers in Process Control 
5.	Krishnakanth, Computerised Based Industrial Controls 
6.	B.G Liptak - Handbook of Process Control - 1996 
7.	Jon Stenerson “Fundamentals of Programmable Logic Controllers, Sensors and Communications”, Prentice Hall of India. 
8.	John webb: Programmable logic controllers, PHI 
9.	Deshpande, P.B. and Ash R.H., Elements of Computer Process Control, Instruments Society of America, 1981 
10.	C.L.Smith, Digital Computer Process Control, Intext Educational Publications 1972 
11.	M.P.Lukas, Distributed Control System, Van Nostrand Rainhold Compony 1986. 
12. Frank D Petruzella,  Programmable Logic Controllers (Mc Graw Hill)
13.	Dobrivoje Popovic and Vijay P. Bhatkar - Distributed Computer Control for Industrial Automation - Marcel Dekker, INC, 1990. 

14.	LIPTAK, Instrument engineers hand book: Process software and digital networks , third edition. 
15.	LIPTAK, Instrument engineers hand book: Process measurement and analysis, fourth edition. 
