AI010 603

INDUSTRIAL INSTRUMENTATION I
(Common to EI010 603, IC010 603)


Teaching scheme	Credits: 4

3 hours lecture and 1 hour tutorial per week

Objectives

1.	To provide exposure to various measuring techniques for force, torque velocity, acceleration, vibration, density, pressure and temperature. 
2.	At the end of the course the student will have an indepth knowlwdge in units, different techniques, and significance of measuring devices. 

Module 1 (12 hours)

Measurement of Force, Torque, Velocity :-

Basic methods of measurement of force (weight) :scales and balances- mechanical balances- electro magnetic balance – Different types of load cells : hydraulic load cells - pneumatic loadcell - magneto elastic (pressductor)- strain gauge loadcell - proving ring.
Different methods of torque measurement: Strain gauge, Relative regular twist-measurement of torque with spur gears – and proximity sensors.
Speed and velocity measurement: Revelution counter- Capacitive tachometer -Drag cup type tacho meter- D.C and A.C tacho generators – Stroboscope- translational velocity transducers. Velocity measurement using variable reluctance proximity pickup. Calibration methods.

Module 2 (12 hours)

Measurement of acceleration, vibration and density :-

Accelerometers – potentiometric type – LVDT- Piezo-electric, capacitive - Strain gauge and variable reluctance type accelerometers.
Mechanical type vibration instruments – Seismic instrument as an accelerometer and vibrometer – measurement of relative motion - Calibration of vibration pick ups
Units of density, specific gravity and viscosity used in industries – Baume scale API scale – hydro meter- density measurement using LVDT- differential pressure method-pressure head type densitometer – float type densitometer – Ultrasonic densitometer – Bridge type gas densitometer-coriolis densitometer. .

Module 3 (12 hours)

Pressure measurement : - Units of pressure – different types of pressure - Manometers – Different types –errors in manometers- Elastic type pressure gauges – Bourden tube - Bellows – Diaphragms – Electrical methods – Elastic elements with LVDT and strain gauges – potentiometric pressure transducers- Capacitive type pressure gauge –Piezo electric pressure sensor –Resonator pressure sensor – optical pressure transducers-pressure switches- Measurement of vacuum – McLeod gauge –Thermal vacuum gauges
 
– Ionization gauge -Testing and calibration of pressure gauges – Dead weight tester- Bulk gauge(high pressure measurement).





Module 4 (12 hours)

Temperature measurement :- Definitions and standards – Primary and secondary fixed points – Calibration of thermometers - Different types of filled in system thermometer – Sources of errors in filled in systems and their compensation – Bimetallic thermometers – Electrical methods of temperature measurement – resistance thermometers-3 lead and 4 lead RTDs - Thermistors –Linearization techniques.

Module 5 (12 hours)

Thermocouples –thermocouple junctions- Law of thermocouple – Fabrication of industrial thermocouples– Signal conditioning of thermocouple output –– Commercial circuits for cold junction compensation –– Special techniques for measuring high temperature using thermocouples – Radiation methods of temperature measurement – Radiation fundamentals – Total radiation pyrometers – Optical pyrometer – infra red pyrometers- Two colour radiation pyrometer.- IC temperature sensors- fiber optic temperature measurement- calibration of temperature transducers.

Text Books

1.	A.K.Sawhney, A course in mechanical measurements and  Instrumentation–
	Dhanpat Rai and Sons, New Delhi, 1999.
2.	R. K. Jain, Mechanical and Industrial Measurements, Khanna Publishers, New
Delhi, 1999.

References

1.	D.Patranabis, Principles of Industrial Instrumentation, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Ltd., New Delhi, 1999. 
2.	B.C.Nakra and K.K.Chaudary, Instrumentation Measurement and Analysis, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Company Ltd., New Delhi, 1985. 

3.	S.K.singh, industrial instrumentation and control, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Ltd., New Delhi, 2006 
