AI 010 802

Instrumentation in Process Industries

(common to EI010 802)

Teaching scheme Credits: 4 2 hours lecture and 2 hours tutorial per week


Objectives:

•	To give a basic knowledge about unit operations. 

•	To provide exposure to the process and instrumentation applications in different industries. 

MODULE 1

Basic concepts and principles of commonly used unit operations – Reactors – batch reactors – distillation towers – refrigeration units – steam boilers – furnaces – dryers – crystallizers – centrifuges – heat exchangers – pumps – compressors – evaporators – extruders.

MODULE 2

Instrumentaion in the Food industry : Description of the process – Measurment hardware in the food industries – Analyzers in the food industry – Valves and feeders in the food industry – Controllers and displays in the food industry – Computer applications in the food industry – Typical control systems in the food industry

MODULE 3

Instrumentation in the iron and steel industry: Description of the process – Measurment hardware

– analyzers – valves - Controllers and displays in the iron and steel industry – Computer applications in the iron and steel industry – Typical control systems in the iron and steel industry

MODULE 4

Instrumentaion in the Paper industry : Description of the process – Measurment hardware in the Paper industry – Analyzers in the Paper industry – Valves and feeders in the Paper industry – Controllers and displays in the Paper industry – Computer applications in the Paper industry – Typical control systems in the Paper industry.

Instrumentation in the Nuclear industy: Description of the process- Measurement hardware in the nuclear industry – Analysers in the nuclear industry – Valves and control rodes in the nuclear industry – Control panels and displays – Computer applications – Typical control system.

MODULE 5

Instrumentaion in the pharmaceutical industry : Description of the process – Measurment hardware in the pharmaceutical industry – Analyzers in the pharmaceutical industry – Valves and
feeders in the pharmaceutical industry – Controllers and displays in the pharmaceutical industry – Computer applications in the pharmaceutical industry – Typical control systems in the pharmaceutical industry.

Text Book:

1.	Instrumentation in the Processing Industries , Bela G Liptak (ed.), Chilton Book Company 

Reference Books:

1.	Unit operation in chemical Engg. McCabe Smith 4/e Mcgrans Hill 

2.	Outline Chemical Technology M Gopal Rao &M Sitting 3/E East West 1973 
3.	Chemical Engineering Hand book Peiry,McGrans Hill 
4.	Chemical reaction Engineering O leven spielJ.Wiley & sons 
 

