AI010 706L01

Robotics

Teaching scheme	Credits: 4

2 hours lecture and 2 hours tutorial per week

Objectives:

•	To familiarize the students with the fundamental concepts of robotics and automation. 
•	To introduce basic elements and subsystems of robots. 

•	To generate an awareness of various applications of robots. 

Module1

Robot Organization
Introduction to robotics: Evolution of robots, laws of robotics, progressive advancements in robots, robot anatomy. Links, joints, degrees of freedom, arm configuration, wrist configuration, end effectors, manipulation and control. Coordinate frames: description of objects in space, transformation of vectors, inverting a homogeneous transform, fundamental rotation matrices, Euler angle representations.
Forward kinematics: mechanical structure and notations, description of links and joints, kinematic modeling of the manipulator, Denavit-Hartenberg notation, kinematic relationship between adjacent links manipulator transformation matrix
Inverse kinematics: Manipulator workspace, solvability of inverse kinematic model.

Module 2 Robot hardware

Robot sensors: proximity sensors ,range sensors, tactile sensors, , position sensors, velocity sensors Visual Sensors and auditory sensors.Robot Manipulators introduction: wrists, robot gripper, manipulator control
Dynamic modeling (proofs not required): Lagrangian mechanics, two degree freedom manipulator, Lagrange Euler formulation, velocity of a point on the manipulator.

Module 3

Introduction to robot control
Control of manipulators: linear control schemes, partitioned PD control scheme,PID control scheme, computed torque control,force control of robotic manipulators,hybrid position force control,impedance force torque control,adaptive control.

Module 4

Robot and Artificial Intelligence
Principles of all basics of Learning, planning movement,basics of knowledge representation, robot programming languages,trajectory planning (only a brief introduction required) and remote manipulation.

Module 5

Robotic Vision Systems
Principles of edge detection, determination of optical flow and shape, image segmentation, pattern recognition, model director sense analysis.

Textbooks

1.	R K Mittal , I J Nagrath, Robotics and control,Tata McGraw Hill 

2.	M.P .Groover,Mitchell Weiss, Roger N.Nagel, Nicholas G Odrey, Industrial 
Robotics,  Tata McGraw Hill.
3.  Lee, Gonzalez aqnd Fu “Robotics (11 Ed)”, IEEE Press, 1986

References

1.	Hall and Hall” Robotics – A User Friendly Introduction”, Saunders Publishing Company, 1985 
2.	Vokobravotic “Introduction to Robotics”, Springer 1988 
3.	Charniakand, Mcdermott, “Roboty Technology ande Applications”, Springer 1985 
4.	Charniac & Mcdermott, “Introduction to Artificial Intelligence”, Mc Graw Hill, 1986 
5.	P Janaki Raman, “Robotics”, Tata Mcgraw Hill 
