AI 010 801

Instrumentation System Design
(common to EI010 801 and IC 010 801)

Teaching scheme	Credits: 4

3 hours lecture and 2 hours tutorial per week

Objective

To help the students get basic understanding of the following:

•	Design of instrumentation systems for various applications. 

•	Design of electronic and pneumatic controllers. 

•	Piping and instrumentation diagrams. 

•	Procedures for the preparation of an instrumentation project. 

•	Noise and noise reduction techniques in measurement. 

Module 1

Sensing element : Elastic sensing elements - Cantilever and torque elements, Pillar load cell, Strain gauge accelerometer- Inductive push pull displacement sensor -Capacitive level sensor .

Signal conditioning element :Design of resistive and reactive bridges for sensors. Design of the bridge Circuit for RTD- Design of reference junction compensation for thermocouple.- Linearising techniques for thermocouple and thermistor- Design of charge amplifier-Instrumentation amplifier. A.C. carrier systems.- Lock in amplifier.

Module 2

Current transmitters-Concept of 2 and 4 wire transmitters with 4-20mA output- Open loop and closed loop current transmitters. Smart transmitters- Future trends in intelligent devices- Design of pneumatic and electronic PID controllers-Design of ON-OFF controllers with neutral zone -Design of instrumentation servo mechanism- Design of annunciators - Low level and high level annunciators.- Enunciators

Module 3

Orifice meter- Design of orifice for a given flow condition for compressible and incompressible fluids -Design of rotameter- Design of venturi meter- Bourdon gauges-Factors affecting sensitivity- Design of bourdon tubes- Design of square root extractors for variable head flow meters.

Module 4

Piping and instrumentation diagrams – ISA symbols – Process and instrumentation (PI)diagram of typical process plant – Preparation of instrumentation project – Documents to be produced- Process flow sheet – mechanical flow sheets- Instrument index sheet – Instrument specification sheet – Process information required - process information – Bid documents – project procedures – Project schedule – Vendor drawings

– Work coordination – Project manager – process engineer – Equipment engineer – Job execution – planning hints- scheduling - Project checklist – equipment delivery - Conclusion Instrument specification sheet for pressure – Choice of temperature – flow – level – analytical instruments and control panels.


Module 5

Signals and noise in instrument systems – Statistical representation – pdf – psd – Auto correlation function – Effects of noise and interference – Series and common mode – Noise sources and coupling mechanisms – Multiple earths – Methods of reduction of noise – Shielding – Screening – Filtering – Modulation – Averaging – Auto correlation .




Text Books

1.	John P. Bentley : Principles of measurement systems, Longman 1983 

2.	Johnson C.D: Process control instrumentation technology, 4/e, PHI, 1995 
3.	D.Patranabis : Principles of Industrial Instrumentation, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Ltd. New Delhi, 1999 

4.	Sheingold D. H.: Transducer interfacing hand book – a guide to analog signal conditioning, analog devices Inc masschusetts, 1980. 
5.	Anderson N A : Instrumentation for process measurement and control :Chilton book company 1980. 

6.	Andrew w: Applied Instrumentation in process Industries; Vol. II. Gulf publications, 1990. 
7.	Doebelin.E.O. Measurement systems applications and design, McGraw Hill, 1975. 
8.	Tattamangalam R. Padmanabhan : Industrial Instrumentation Principles and Design, Springer International 
9.	E. Radhakrishnan : Instrumentation, measurements and Experiments in Fluids, 
Boca Raton, FL : CRC Press
 

