AI010 505

CONTROL ENGINEERING I
(Common to EI010 505)
Teaching scheme Credits: 4 2 hours lecture and 2 hour tutorial per week


Objectives

1)	To give the fundamental concept of the analysis and design techniques of control systems by transfer function approach. 
2)	To get an adequate knowledge in the time response of systems and steady state error analysis. 
3)	To learn the concept of stability of control system and methods of stability analysis. 
4)	To study the three ways of designing compensation for a control system. 

5)	To get an exposure to MAT lab programs for control system analysis. 

Module 1 (12 Hours)

System modeling - Transfer function approach :

Introduction to control system – Classification of control systems. Principles of automatic control- Feed back systems –Practical examples – Transfer function – Transfer function of electrical, mechanical and electromechanical system – Block diagram – Signal flow graph – Mason’s gain formula.

Module 2 (12 Hours)

Time domain analysis :

Standard test signals - Response of systems to standard test signals – Step response of second order systems in detail – Time domain specifications – Steady state response – Steady state error- Static & Dynamic error coefficients- MAT lab programs for time domain analysis.

Module 3 (12 Hours)

Stability of linear systems in time domain – Routh’s criterion of stability. Root locus - Construction of root locus – Effect of addition of poles and zeros on root locus-MAT lab programs for stability analysis.

Module 4 (12 Hours)

Frequency domain analysis :

Frequency response – Frequency domain specifications – Stability in the frequency domain - Nyquist stability criterion – Stability from polar and Bode plots - Relative stability – Gain margin and phase margin – M & N circles – Nichol’s chart – MAT lab programs for frequency domain analysis.

Module 5 (12 Hours)

Design of compensators:
 
Introduction to design – compensation techniques – Lead, Lag and Lead -Lag compensation using RC network --Design of Lead, Lag and Lead-Lag compensators using bode plots.



References

1.	Modern control engineering – Katsuhiko Ogata, Pearson Edn. 
2.	Control systems principles and design: M. Gopal, TMH. 
3.	Automatic control system – B.C. Kuo, PHI. 
4.	Control system design: Graham C Goodwin, PHI. 
5.	Modern Control Systems: Dorf, Pearson Education. 
