AI010 605

Control Engineering II
(Common to EI010 605)


Teaching scheme	Credits: 4

2 hours lecture and 1 hour tutorial per week

Objectives

1.	To study the modeling of the systems using State Space methods 

2.	To learn State variable analysis and design of continuous time systems 

3.	To get an exposure to digital control systems. 
4.	To understand the basic concepts of nonlinear systems 

Module 1 (12 Hours)

System modeling using state variable approach -Limitation of Conventional Control Theory. Concepts of state variables and state model - State model for linear time invariant systems.-State space representation of dynamic systems – Nonuniqueness of state model- Block diagram representations- State diagrams- Lagrange’s equations .

Module 2 (12 Hours)

Transformation of state variables- State space representations of transfer functions-Solution of differential equations in state space form- Interpretation and properties of the state transition matrix - Solution by the Laplace transform - The resolvent - Transfer function from state model.

Module 3 (12 Hours)

State variable analysis - controllability and observability. Gilber test and Kalman’s tests. Design of regulators for single input single output systems, Bass- gura pole placement formula. Linear observers: Need of observers, Structure and properties of observers, Pole placement for single output systems.

Module 4 (12 Hours)

Discrete time systems - Introduction to digital control system –Review of Z-transform and properties.- inverse z transform- z transform method for solving difference equations-Impulse sampling and data hold circuits -Zero order and First order hold – signal reconstruction –Practical aspects of the choice of sampling rate-Pulse transfer function - The Z and S domain relationships -Stability analysis - Jury's test-Bilinear transformation .

Module 5 (12 Hours)
 
Nonlinear systems- Behaviour of nonlinear systems-Common physical nonlinearities-The phase plane method- basic concepts- Singular points- Describing function method – Basic concepts-- Describing functions of saturation and dead zone nonlinearities. – Stability of nonlinear systems- limit cycles.

(Detailed analysis not required).



Text Books

1.	K. Ogata , Modern Control Engineering , Prentice Hall of India 

2.	K. Ogata , Discrete Time Control Systems ,Prentice Hall Of India. 
3.	M. Gopal , Digital Controls and State Variable Methods ,TMH Pub. Com. 
4.	B. C. Kuo , Automatic Control Systems, Prentice Hall of India. 
5.	J. Nagrath & M. Gopal ,Control System Engineering , New Age Int. (P) Ltd 
6.	B.Friedland, Control System Design- An Introduction to state space methods- Mc 
Graw Hill, Inc.N Y.
