EN010 401 Engineering Mathematics III

(Common to all branches)

Teaching scheme	Credits: 4

2 hours lecture and 2 hour tutorial per week

Objectives: Apply standard methods of mathematical &statistical analysis

Module 1  (12 hours)

Fourier series: Dirichlet conditions – Fourier series with period 2 p and 2l – Half range sine and cosine
series – Harmonic Analysis – r.m.s Value.

Module 2  (12 hours)

Fourier Transform : Statement of Fourier integral theorem – Fourier transforms – derivative of transforms- convolution theorem (no proof) – Parsevals identity.

Module 3 (12 hours)

Partial differential equations : Formation by eliminating arbitrary constants and arbitrary functions – solution of Lagrange’s equation – Charpits method –solution of Homogeneous partial differential equations with constant coefficients.

Module 4 (12 hours)

Probability distribution : Concept of random variable , probability distribution – Bernoulli’s trial – Discrete distribution – Binomial distribution – its mean and variance- fitting of Binominal distribution – Poisson distribution as a limiting case of Binominal distribution – its mean and variance – fitting of Poisson distribution – continuous distribution- Uniform distribution – exponential distribution – its mean and variance – Normal distribution – Standard normal curve- its properties.

Module 5 (12 hours)

Testing of hypothesis : Populations and Samples – Hypothesis – level of significance – type I and type II error – Large samples tests – test of significance for single proportion, difference of proportion, single mean, difference of mean – chi –square test for variance- F test for equality of variances for small samples.

References

1.	Bali& Iyengar – A text books of Engg. Mathematics – Laxmi Publications Ltd. 

2.	M.K. Venkataraman – Engg. Mathematics vol II 3rd year part A & B – National Publishing Co. 

3.	I.N. Sneddon – Elements of partial differential equations – Mc Graw Hill 

4.	B.V. Ramana – Higher Engg. Mathematics – Mc Graw Hill 

5.	Richard A Johnson – Miller Fread’s probability & Statistics for Engineers- Pearson/ PHI 

6.	T. Veerarajan – Engg. Mathematics – Mc Graw Hill 

7.	G. Haribaskaran – Probability, Queueing theory and reliability Engg. – Laxmi Publications 

8.	V. Sundarapandian - probability ,Statistics and Queueing theory – PHI 

9.	H.C.Taneja – Advanced Engg. Mathematics Vol II – I.K.International 

10.	A.K.Mukhopadhyay-Mathematical Methods For Engineers and Physicists-I.K.International 
 
