CE010 403: MECHANICS OF SOLIDS- II

Teaching scheme:	Credits: 4
2 hour lecture and 2 hour tutorial per week

Objectives:

•	To understand the basic strength and energy theorems of Structural Mechanics and its applications 
•	To study deformations of bodies caused by externally applied forces and the internal effects produced due to moving loads. 

. 

Module 1 (12 hours) 

Deflection of determinate beams: Differential equation of the elastic curve- slope 
& deflection of beams by Double integration method (concept only)-Macaulay’s method - Conjugate beam method 
Deflection due to shear (concept only). 

Module 2 (12 hours)

Energy Theorems: Strain energy due to axial load( gradual, sudden & impact), bending, shear and torsion- principle of super position- Betti’ s theorem -Maxwell’ s reciprocal theorem-principle of virtual work(deformable bodies)-Castigliano’ s first theorem-deflection of statically determinate beams & pin jointed frames by strain energy, virtual work and unit load methods

Module 3 (12 hours)

Moving loads and influence lines: effect of moving loads-influence lines for reaction, shear force and bending moment for determinate beams
Absolute maximum bending moment (basic concept only).

Module 4 (12 hours)

Arches: Theoretical arch-Eddy’ s theorem- analysis of three hinged arches –support reactions-normal thrust-radial shear
Cables and suspension bridges: General cable theorem-analysis of cables under concentrated and uniformly distributed loads-anchor cables
Suspension bridges with stiffening girders(basic concepts only).

Module 5 (12 hours)

Theories of Elastic Failure: Maximum principal stress theory-maximum shear stress theory - maximum principal strain theory – Mohr’s theory. Principle of stationary and minimum potential energy, Castigliano’s theorems (theory only)
Unsymmetrical bending: Product of inertia-principal axes (basic concepts only)

References:

1.Devdas Menon, Structural Analysis, Vol.1, Narosa, Chennai.
2.	Bhavikatti S.S , Structural Analysis Vol. I, Vikas Publishing House (P) Ltd. 
3.	Reddy C.S., Basic Structural Analysis, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Co.1996. 
4.	C. K. Wang, Intermediate Structural Analysis, Tata McGraw Hill Education Private Ltd. 
5.	Smith J.C. Structural Analysis, Macmillian Pub.Co.1985. 
 
6.	Rajesekharan &Sankarasubramanian,G., Computational Structural Mechanics, Prentice Hall of India, 2001. 
7.	Wang C.K.& Solomon C.G., Introductory Structural Analysis, McGraw Hill.1968. 
8.	Sadhu Sindh, Strength of Materials, Khanna Publishers, 1988. 
9.	Seeli F.B.& Smith J.P., Advanced Mechanics of Materials, John Wiley &Sons, 1993. 
10.	Norris & Wilbur, Elementary Structural Analysis, McGraw Hill. 
11.	Junarker S.R., Mechanics of Structures, Vol. II, Charorbar Book Stall. 
12.	Timoshenko S.P, Young D.H., Theory of structures, McGraw Hill 
13.	Thadani B.N, Desai J.P, Structural mechanics, Weinall Book Corporation. 
14.	Punmia B.C., Strength of materials and theory of structures, Vol.II, Laxmi publications. 
