CE010 405  SURVEYING - II

Teaching Scheme	Credits : 4

3 hour lecture and 1hour tutorial per week

Objective

To impart knowledge in triangulation, aerial photogrammetry and modern Electro Magnetic Distance Measurement instruments.

Module 1 (12 hours)

Triangulation: triangulation figures – classification of triangulation systems – selection of triangulation stations – intervisibility and heights of stations – station marks – signals and towers – base line – choice – measurement of base lines – instrument- extension of base- satellite stations – need, reduction to centre.

Module 2 (12 hours)

Theory of errors and triangulation Adjustments: Kinds of error – laws of weights
– principles of least squares – determination of most probable value of quantities – probable error – distribution of error to the field measurements – normal equation – Method of correlatives – Adjustment of simple triangulation figures.

Module 3 (10 hours)

Hydrographic surveying –Equipment – Methods of locating soundings – reduction and plotting of soundings – use of sextants and station pointer.

Electro Magnetic Distance Measurement (EDM): - Principle of EDM – Types of EDM instruments – Distomat – Total Station – principles – procedure and surveying using Total Station – data retrieval and processing.

Module 4 (12 hours)

Terrestrial photogrammetry – General principles – photo theodolite – horizontal position of a point from photogrammetric measurements – elevation of a point – determination of focal length of lens. Aerial photogrammetry – aerial camera – scale of vertical photograph – relief displacement on a vertical photograph – principle of parallax – stereoscopic pairs – flight planning – radial line method – flying height and overlaps – remote sensing – concepts of remote sensing – ideal remote sensing system.

Module 5 (14 hours)

Geodesy – shape of earth – effects of curvature – spherical excess – convergence of meridians.

Field Astronomy: - Definitions – celestial sphere – astronomical triangle - co-ordinate systems. Determination of time, azimuth, latitude and longitude.

References:

1.	T. P. Kanetkar and Kulkarni, Surveying and leveling Vol. II, A.V.G. Publications, Pune. 
 
2.	B. C. Punmia, Surveying and leveling Vol. II, Laxmi Publications (P) LTD, New Delhi. 
3.	Thoms M. Lillerand, Remote sensing and image interpretation, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. New York. 
4.	Dr. K.R. Arora, Surveying Vol. II, Standard Book House, New Delhi. 
5.	Alak De, Plane Surveying, S.Chand &Co. 
6.	S. K. Duggal – Surveying Vol I & II Tata Mc Graw Hill Ltd, 2006. 
7.	R. Sathikumar, Satheesh Gopi and N. Madhu, Advanced Surveying: Total Station, GIS and remote Sensing, Pearson Education, India 
