CE010 502 COMPUTER PROGRAMMING

Teaching Scheme	Credit: 4

3 hours lecture and 1hour tutorial per week.

Objective:

To provide a strong foundation in the basics of C-Programming so that  students can
develop the ability to design software’s.

Module I (15 Hours)

Introduction to C: The C character set- identifiers and keywords- data types-user defined data types-constants and variables-declarations- operators-expressions-statements-library input-output functions
Control statements: if, if-else, switch, -conditional and comma operators.

Module II (15 Hours)

Iterative statements: ’while’, ’do-while’, for ‘statements-nested loops, break and continue statements.
Functions: Declarations, definition and access-passing arguments to a function – pass by value and pass by reference-recursion.
Storage classes: automatic variables-external variables-register variables-scope and lifetime of variables-macros

Module III (12 Hours)

Arrays: Single dimensional arrays-multidimensional arrays-definition-initializing arrays-passing arrays to a function- matrix operations-addition, transpose and multiplication. Pointers-declaration-operations.
Strings: definition –string handling function-comparison, concatenation and sorting of strings

Module IV (10 Hours)

Structures and union: definition –initialization-accessing structure members-array of structures-passing structure to a function –sorting of structures –binary files-reading and writing of data blocks-union.
Dynamic memory allocation - self referential structures - basic concepts of linked lists.

Module V (8 Hours)

Files :File pointers-data files-opening and closing-reading and writing-appending-error handling function-handling data in blocks-command line arguments.

References

1.B.S. Gotterfield Theory and Problems of Programming with C.TMH
2.	Balaguruswamy, Programming in C, Tata Mc Graw Hill. 
3.	Kern Ingham , Ritchie, The C programming language, Prentice Hall. 
4.	Byron S Gottfried, Programming with C, Tata Mc Graw Hill. 
 
5.	Y. Kenetker, Let us C, BPB Publications. 

6.	V. Rajaraman, Programming with C. 
7.	Y. Kenetker, Exploring C, BPB Publications. 
 
