CE010 503  DESIGN OF CONCRETE STRUCTURES – I

Teaching Scheme	Credit: 4

2 hours lecture and 2 hours tutorial per week.

Objective

•	To provide the students with the knowledge of behaviour of reinforced concrete structural elements in flexure, shear, compression and tension and to enable them to design such elements. 

Module 1 (12 hours)

Working stress method: Introduction- permissible stresses-factor of safety – behaviour of R.C.C beams –assumptions-under reinforced –over reinforced and balanced sections. Theory of singly and doubly reinforced beams.

Module 2  (12 hours)

Limit state method: Concepts -assumptions –characteristic strength and load partial safety factors-limit states-limit state of collapse –limit state of

serviceability. Theory of singly and doubly reinforced rectangular sections in flexure-design of simply supported and flanged beams.

Module 3  (15 hours)

Behaviour and design of one way and two way slabs-Continuous slabs-analysis using method recommended by BIS -arrangements of reinforcement in slabs. Design of flat slab (Concept only).

Module 4   (8 hours)

Design of columns: Limit state method- I S specifications-design of columns with lateral and helical reinforcement-members subjected to combined axial load and bending.

Module 5   (13 hours)

Design of footings-Isolated footing with axial and eccentric loading-combined footing. Stair cases-introduction to different types-design of simply supported flights-cantilever steps.

Note: Sketches only required for reinforcement details. Detailed drawing in drawing sheets not required.

References

1.	Relevant IS codes. (I.S 456, I.S 875,SP 16) 

2.	Park R and Pauloy T, Reinforced concrete structures, John Wiely & sons Inc. 
3.	Purushothaman P, Reinforced concrete structural elements-Behaviour, Analysis and Design, Tata McGraw Hill publishing company Ltd. 
4.	Unnikrishna Pillai S. & D.Menon, Reinforced concrete design, Tata McGraw Hill 
 
Publishing company Ltd.

5.	Mallick S.K., Reinforced concrete, Oxford & IBH Publishing company. 
6.	Varghese P.C., Limit state design of Reinforced concrete, Printice Hall of India Pvt Ltd. 
7.	Ashok .K. Jain, Reinforced concrete- Limit state design, New Chand & Bose. 
8.	S.S Bhavikatti, Design of Reinforced concrete structures, I.K.International Publishing house Pvt.Ltd 
