CE010 504 GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEERING – I

Teaching scheme:	Credits: 4

3 hour lecture and 1 hour tutorial per week

Objective:

Geotechnical Engineering is one of the important disciplines of Civil Engineering involving the study of behaviour and engineering properties of soil.
The objective of the course is to present different laws and principles of Soil Mechanics so that the strength and settlement of the foundation soil can be evaluated.

Module 1 (15 Hours)

Soil formation and soil types: Residual soil and transported soil-Soil structure-Basic structural units of clay minerals. Simple soil properties: three phase systems

-	void ratio - porosity - degree of saturation - moisture content - specific gravity - unit weight relationships. 
Laboratory and field identification of soils: Determination of water content, specific gravity, determination of field density by core cutter and sand replacement method, grain size analysis by sieve, hydrometer analysis 
-	Atterberg limits and indices - field identification of soils. 
Classification of soils: Principles of classification - I. S. classification - plasticity chart.

Module 2 (13 Hours)

Permeability of soils: Darcy’s law - factors affecting - constant head
and falling head test - permeability of stratified deposits. soil- water system - classification of soil water - capillarity of soils - principles of effective stress. Seepage of soils: seepage pressure, critical hydraulic gradient - quick
sand condition - flownet diagram for isotropic and anisotropic soils
.
Module 3 (10 Hours)
Shear strength: Shear strength parameters - Mohr’s circle – Mohr Coulomb strength theory -direct, triaxial, unconfined and vane shear tests- Drainage conditions - UU, CD and CD tests - choice of test conditions for field problems - measurement of pore pressure-critical void ratio and liquefaction. - Activity ,sensitivity and thixotropy

Module 4 (12 Hours)

Compaction: Objects of compaction - proctor test and modified proctor test - concept of OMC and Max. dry density - Zero air void line - factors affecting compaction - effect of compaction on soil properties - field methods-.of compaction - control of compaction.
Stability of slopes: types of failures of soil slopes - Analysis of finite slopes only-Swedish circle method - = 0 analysis and c - analysis. -Taylor’s stability number and stability charts
.
 

Module 5 (10 Hours)

Compressibility and consolidation of soils: void ratio - pressure relationship - concept of coefficient of compressibility - coefficient of volume change and compression index - normally loaded and pre loaded deposits - determination of preconsolidation pressure - Terzaghi’s theory of one dimensional consolidation - time rate of consolidation - time factor - degree of consolidation - square root time and log time - fitting methods - coefficient of consolidation - calculation of void ratio - height of solids methods and change in void ratio method - settlement analysis.

References

1.	Murthy V. N.S, Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Nai Sarak, Delhi. 

2.	Gopal Ranjan and A .S .R .Rao, Basic and Applied Soil Mechanics, New Age International Publishers. 
3.	Punmia B. C., Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Laxshmi Publications, New Delhi. 
4.	Arora K. R., Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Standard Publishers, Distributors. 
5.	V. Narasimha Rao and Venkatramaiah, Numerical Problems, Examples and Objective Questions in Geotechnical Engineering, Orient LongMan Publishers. 
6.	Lambe & Whitman, Soil Mechanics, John Wiely Publications 
7.	S. K. Garg, Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Khanna Publishers. 
 
