CE 010 506 STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS I

Teaching scheme:	Credits: 4
3hour lecture and 1 hour tutorial per week

Objective:

To study the force and displacement methods of structural analysis of indeterminate structures , the influence line diagrams and an introduction to Finite Element Method.

Module 1 (12 hours)

Indeterminate structures- force and displacement methods of structural analysis. Force method of analysis of indeterminate structures - static indeterminacy

Method of consistent deformation, Clapyron’ s theorem of three moments- analysis of fixed and continuous beams

Module 2 (12 hours)

Displacement method of analysis: Kinematic indeterminacy
Slope deflection method- fundamental equations-analysis of continuous beams & portal frames (with sway and without sway)
Moment distribution method - analysis of continuous beams & portal frames (with sway and without sway).

Module 3 (14 hours)

Matrix methods: Stiffness method-stiffness-equilibrium equation
Direct stiffness method - structure stiffness matrix-assembly of structure stiffness matrix from element stiffness matrix-equivalent joint load – incorporation of boundary conditions –analysis of beams and pin-jointed frames.

Module 4 (10 hours)

Flexibility method: Flexibility –compatibility equation-flexibility influence coefficients – force transformation matrix-flexibility matrix-analysis of beams & frames (rigid and pin-jointed).

Module 5 (12hours)

Finite element method: Introduction to FEM-Historical development-Idealization of actual structures- Boundary conditions. General procedure of FEA-Displacement approach - shape functions

References

1.Devdas Menon, Structural Analysis, Vol.1&II, Narosa, Chennai.

2.	Bhavikatti S.S , Structural Analysis Vol. I, Vikas Publishing House (P) Ltd. 
3.	Weaver &Gere, Matrix Analysis of Structures, East West Press. 
4.	Moshe F. Rubinstein – Matrix Computer Analysis of Structures- Prentice Hall, 1969. 
5.	Meek J.L., Matrix Structural Analysis, McGraw Hill,1971. 
6.	Reddy C.S., Basic Structural Analysis, Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Co.1996. 
 
7.	Smith J.C. Structural Analysis, Macmillian Pub.Co.1985. 

8.	Rajesekharan & Sankarasubramanian,G., Computational Structural Mechanics, Prentice Hall of India, 2001. 
9.	Mukhopadhyay M., Matrix Finite Element Computer and Structural Analysis, Oxford & IBH,1984. 
10.	Wang C.K.& Solomon C.G., Introductory Structural Analysis, McGrawHill.1968. 

11.	Pezemieniecki, J.S, Theory of Matrix Structural Analysis, McGraw Hill Co., 1984 

12.	Sadhu Sindh, Strength of Materials, Khanna Publishers, 1988. 
13.	Seeli F.B.&Smith J.P., Advanced Mechanics of Materials, John Wiley &Sons, 1993. 
14.	Norris & Wilbur, Elementary Structural Analysis, McGraw Hill. 
15.	Junarker S.R., Mechanics of Structures, Vol. II, Charorbar Book Stall. 
16.O C Zienkiewicz,.Finite Element Method, fourth Edition,McGraw Hill,
17.	R.D.Cook, Concepts and Applications of Finite Element Analysis, John Wiley &Sons. 
19.	C.S.Krishnamoorthy, Finite Element Analysis, Tata McGraw Hill .New Delhi, 1987. 
20.	S.Rajasekharan, Finite Element Analysis, Wheeler Publishing Co., &Sons.1993. 
 
