CE010 604  TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERING - I

Teaching scheme:	Credits: 4

3 hour lecture and 1 hour tutorial per week

Objective: To gain an in-depth knowledge on operating characteristics of facilities such as railways and water transportation

Module 1(15 hours)

Introduction: Transportation modes - comparison and characteristics of highway and railway. Modern developments – Surface, elevated and tube railways, light rail transit, high speed tracks - technologies
Railway track: Alignment- basic requirements and factors affecting selection, Component parts of a railway track - requirements and functions - Typical cross section - Rails – functions and requirements, Type of rail sections, rail fastenings, wear and creep of rails - coning of wheels, Train resistances and evaluation of hauling capacity and tractive effort of locomotive.
Geometric design of railway track: Horizontal curves, radius – super elevation - cant deficiency - transition curves - gradients - different types - Compensation of gradients.

Module 2 (10 hours)

Railway operation and control: Points and Crossings – Design features of a turn out – Details of station yards and marshalling yards – Signaling, interlocking of signals and points - Principles of track circuiting - Control systems of train movements – ATC, CTC – track circuiting

Module 3 (10 hours)

Tunnel Engineering: Tunnel - sections - classification - tunnel surveying - alignment, transferring centre, grade into tunnel – tunnel driving procedure - shield method of tunneling, compressed air method, tunnel boring machine, Tunnel lining, ventilation - lighting and drainage of tunnels.

Module 4 (15 hours)

Harbour Engineering: Harbours – classification, features, requirements, winds and waves in the location and design of harbours.
Break waters - necessity and functions, classification, alignment, design principles, forces acting on break water – construction, general study of quays,
piers,	wharves,	jetties,	transit	sheds	and
warehouses	- navigational	aids - light	houses, signals	- types -	Moorings
.					
Module 5 (10 hours)

Dock Engineering: Docks - Functions and types - dry docks, wet docks – form and arrangement of basins and docks – design and construction – dock entrances - floating dry docks, slip ways, dock entrances and caissons. Dredging – functions -
 
general study of dipper dredger, grapple dredger, ladder dredger and hydraulic dredger.

References

1.	Rao G. V, Principles of Transportation and Highway Engineering, Tata McGraw Hill 
2.	Mundrey J. S, Railway Track Engineering, Tata McGraw Hill 
3.	S.C. Rangawala, Railway Engineering, Charotor Publishing House 
4.	S. C Saxena and S. P Arora., Railway Engineering, Dhanpat rai & Sons 
5.	Subhash C. Saxena, Railway Engineering, Dhanpat rai & Sons 
6.	R. Srinivasan, Harbour, Dock & Tunnel Engineering, Charotor Publishing House 
7.	S.P.Bindra, A course in docks and Harbour Engineering, Dhanpat rai & Sons 
