CE010 606L02 OPEN CHANNEL AND COASTAL HYDRAULICS (ELECTIVE - 1)

Teaching Scheme	Credit:4

2 hours lecture and 2 hours tutorial per week.

Objective:

To develop theoretical and practical knowledge on open channel flow and to acquire basic knowledge on Ocean Engineering and related applications.

Module 1(12 Hours)

Open channel flow-Definition-Importance-Classification of flows
Uniform flow- Resistance equation-Chezy’s and Manning’s equation-roughness coefficient.-factions affecting roughness coefficient- normal depth and its computation-conveyance – section factor - specific energy - specific force - diagram – critical flow - section factor -hydraulic exponent for critical flow computation and its use for trapezoidal channel-Application of specific energy and specific force in open channel
.
Module 2( 12 Hours)
Non-uniform flow - friction slope - differential equation of non-uniform flow - types of surface profiles - the point of control - computation by Bresse's method and the simplified step method.

.Module 3( 12 Hours)

Hydraulic jump - sequent depths - dimensionless equation of the jump - loss of head - the jump at the foot of a spillway - criteria for the formation of a jump - use of jump as an energy dissipater. Control of jump by sills - stilling basins

Module 4( 12 Hours)

Water waves - classification into periodic oscillatory, periodic progressive, uniformly progressive, solitary and stationary waves.
Ocean waves – Introduction-characteristics-classification based on wave period. Small amplitude wave theory .expression for the celerity of deep water gravity wave and shallow water gravity wave - determination of the wave length and celerity for any water depth given the deep water wave amount as wave energy (no proof).
Wave Transformations –shoaling- refraction- reflection-diffraction –wave breaking (description only.

Module 5( 12 Hours)

Long period waves-astronomical tide-tsunami, basin oscillations, storm surge, climatologic effects, geologic effects(description only)
Wave forecasting - SMB method.
Coastal erosion with special reference to the Kerala Coast
 
Shore protection measures – break waters of different types-sea walls – tetrapods, groynes and beach nourishment.


References

1.	S.M.Woodword, C.J.Posey, Hydraulic of Steady Flow in Open Channels 
2.	F. N. Henderson, Open Channel Flow 
3.	A. I. Ippen, Estuary and Coast line Hydrodynamics 
4.	K. E. R. I. Peechi, Coastal Engineering Publications 
5.	V. T. Chow, Open Channel hydraulics, Mc Graw Hill 
6.	Robert .M. Sorensen, Basic coastal engineering, John Willey & Sons 
 
