CE010 607 COMPUTER AIDED DESIGN AND DRAFTING LAB

Teaching Scheme	Credit: 2

3 hours practical per week

Objective

To provide familiarity with functional requirements and regulations related to buildings and to enable students to prepare neat building drawings with CAD software so as to minimize effort and maximize output.

Exposure to different categories of building (Private, Public, Residential, Flats, Offices, Clubs/Recreational buildings etc.- Local visit and preparation of sketches

Functional requirements of buildings – Different functional units of a building- Requirements regarding Area, Height, Head room, Width of passage way, Lighting, Ventilation, Public amenities, Setback, Parking, clearance from electric lines, Provision and location of septic Tank-clearance from well, Familiarity with norms in National Building Code and local building rules. Study of building plans (Residential / Commercial / Public buildings / Office/Flats / Cottages etc. ) sanctioned by local authority.

Preparation of 2D drawing- Advantages of CAD over manual drafting- Features of CAD software-menus and tool bars-Concept of drawing in true size- Drawing units- Drawing tools-Editing tools- Controlling display-(zoom, pan, regeneration, redraw) Productivity tools-mirror,copy,block,array,Detailing-layers,color,linetype,ltscale,hatch Inquiry –area, dimension Plotting- scale. Specifications for drawings

Preparation of 3D drawings- Concept of 3D drawing- viewpoint, real-time 3D rotation, 3D modeling techniques- wire modeling, surface modeling, surface revolution, 3D face. Elevation and thickness - addition and subtraction of 3d objects. Shading - rendering.

Application of CAD to Civil Engineering Drawing with emphasis on architectural appearance. Residential, Public buildings complete in all aspect including layout plan, section, elevation, details/specifications/joinery and site plan taken in standard scale with title block.

Exposure to 3D studio and 3D Max

A term project submitted individually and suitable for submitting to local bodies for approval incorporating local building rules and NBC provisions is compulsory for external evaluation.

Assignments:- Submission of neat dimensioned line sketches from local visit Collection and study of approved building plan

Preparing an Elevation for given plans Preparing Plans based on requirements of clients.
References

1.  Reference manual of the package.
 
2.	National building code of India. 

3.	Shah & Kale, Building Drawing, Tata McGraw Hill. 
4.	Balgopal T.S.Prabhu, Building Drawing and Detailing, SPADES Calicut. 
5.	Sham Tickoo, Understanding Auto CAD2002, Tata McGraw Hill. 
6.	Sham Tickoo, Auto CAD2002 with applications, Tata McGraw Hill. 
 
