CE010 606L01 ADVANCED SURVEYING

(ELECTIVE I)
Teaching Scheme	Credit:4

2 hours lecture and 2 hours tutorial per week.

Objective:

To make the students aware of the advanced methods of surveying.

Module 1(12 Hours)

Total station surveying-study of instrument-measurement of parameters-methods of surveying-transferring data-software’s-auto plotter-plotting (assignment).

Module 2 (12 Hours)

Arial photogrammetry: Definition- types of photographs- geometry of photographs – parallax - pair of photographs- height determination- flight planning- stereoscopy.

Module 3 (12 Hours)

Remote sensing: Introduction and definition of remote sensing terminology- principles and methods of remote sensing- electro-magnetic
radiation and spectrum- radiation sources-interference- atmospheric effects on
remote sensing- atmospheric window –energy interaction with surface features-different types of platforms- sensors and their characteristics-orbital parameters of a
satellite- multi concepts in remote sensing.

Module 4 (12 Hours)

Interpretation of images: Aerial photo interpretation – basic elements -techniques of photo interpretation- application of aerial photo interpretation-photographs versus maps- interpretation of satellite images- ground truth
collection and interpretation and verification- advantages of multi date and multi band images.

Module 5 (12 Hours)

Applications: Applications in water resources management- land use mapping and monitoring- soil sciences- geology- agriculture- forestry - oceanography.

References

1.	Thomas M. Lillesand & Raiph W. Kiefer, “Remote sensing and image interpretation”, John Wiley Sons. 
2.	Floyd F. Sabins, “Remote sensing principles and interpretation”, Freeman and company. 
3.	Campbell J. B, “Introduction to remote sensing”, The Guilford press, London. 
4.	Curran P.J., “Principles of remote sensing”, Longman, London. 
5.	Engmen E.T and Gurnay R. J.,”Remote sensing in hydrology”, Chapman and Hall. 
6.	Wolf P.R., “Elements of photogrammetry”, McGraw Hills. 
