CE010 704 ARCHITECTURE AND TOWN PLANNING

Teaching scheme:	Credits: 3

2 hour lecture and 1 hour tutorial per week
Objective:

•	To understand the basic principles of architectural design and functional planning of buildings 
•	To develop knowledge in town planning concepts and related principles 

Module 1 (10 hrs)

Architecture - Definition - factors influencing architectural development, characteristic features of a style - historical examples, Theory of architectural design – pragmatic, iconic, canonic and analogic design, Creative principles - function, strength, aesthetics, primary elements in architectural design, Design principles - unity, balance, proportion, scale, rhythm, character, contrast, texture, form perception, characteristics of form, form expressive of function- form related with material and structural system. Concept of space - activity space, circulation space and tolerance space

Module 2 ( 15 hrs)

Functional planning of buildings: Occupancy classification of buildings - general requirements of site and building - building codes and rules - licensing of building works. Functional planning of residential, institutional, commercial, process of identifying activity areas and linkages - circulation diagrams - checking for circulation, ventilation, structural requirements and other constraints, preparing site plan and working drawings

Module 3 (10 hrs)

Building Services:- Vertical transportation: Stairs -lay out and details of timber, masonry, metal, concrete and precast-concrete stairs-Elevators-drum and traction type, passenger and service goods elevators, design constraints of passenger elevators-handling capacity, arrangement of lifts, Escalators- features, operation arrangements, location - moving walk and moving ramp.
Ventilation and Air conditioning - ventilation requirements -natural and mechanical ventilation - cross ventilation - effect of orientation - calculation of air conditioning load - summer and winter air conditioning- consideration of comfort factors such as acoustics, lighting, and thermal aspects.

Module 4 (13 hrs)

Town planning - Evolution of towns-objectives and principles of town planning- growth of towns - problems of urban growth- garden city movement, conservative surgery and comprehensive planning, Radburn plan - evolution in town planning acts and legislation - forms of planning - requirements of new towns - surveys – zoning - transportation network and planning – housing, neighbourhood unit planning, - legislation on environmental pollution - land use planning and theories.
 
Module 5 (12 hrs)

Planning process:- Master plan, preparation and execution- -planning standards for different land use allocation for commerce, industries, public buildings, parks and play grounds.- implementation of development plans - land acquisitions - slums - causes and clearance schemes

References:

1.	G.K Hiraskar The great Ages of World Architecture – Dhanpat Rai Publications 

(P) Ltd. 

2.	Satish Chandra Agarwala – Architecture and Town Planning- Dhanpat Rai and Co 

3.	Banister Fletcher, History of World Architecture, Taraporevalas. 

4.	Broadbent, Theory of Architecture Design, John Wiley Sons 

5.	V.K Jain – Hand book of Designing and installation of services in building complex – khanna publishers 

6.	Rangwala – Town planning – charotar publishing house. 

7.	G.K Hiraskar – Fundamentals of Town planning – Dhanpat Rai publications. 

8.	Abir Bandyopadhyay – Text book of Town planning – Books and Allied (P) Ltd. 

9.	N.K Gandhi – Study of Town and Country planning in India – Indian Town and Country planning Association. 
