CE010 705	TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERING - II


Teaching scheme:	Credits :3

2 hour lecture and 1 hour tutorial per week

Objective: To understand the principles and design of highway, traffic and airport engineering

Module 1 (8 hours)

Classification, alignment and surveys -classification of highways - typical cross section of roads in urban and rural areas - requirements and factors controlling alignment of roads, engineering surveys for highway location.

Geometric Elements of highways: Highway cross sectional elements - pavement surface characteristics, camber and width requirements, median, kerbs, road margins – right of way, Sight distances - over taking zone requirements and related problems.


Module 2 (14 hours)

Geometric Design of Highways
Design of horizontal alignment - speed – horizontal curves, super elevation - methods of attainment of super elevation - related problems, radius - extra widening - transition curves Design of vertical alignment - gradient and grade compensation – Vertical curves - sight distance requirements on summit and valley curves - simple problems on design of vertical alignment.

Module 3 (8 hours)

Traffic Engineering: Traffic characteristics - traffic studies and their applications Traffic control devices- Traffic signs, traffic signals, road markings and traffic islands. Types of road intersection - kerb parking (Design of traffic signals not expected).


Module 4 (8hours)

Highway materials: Aggregates - desirable properties and tests - Bituminous materials - properties and tests - sub grade soil - desirable properties.

Pavement design: Basic difference between flexible and rigid pavements -factors affecting their design – design of flexible pavements-CBR & IRC Introduction to performance grading and superpave. Types and causes of failures in flexible and rigid pavements, highway drainage.
Highway construction and maintenance: Bituminous surface dressing, bituminous macadam.
 
Module 5 (10 hours)

Airport Engineering: Classification of airports - Aircraft characteristics-planning, selection of site for airport - factors to be considered. Runway orientation and layout of runways: use of wind rose diagrams, basic runway length and corrections required - Imaginary surfaces - approach zone and turning zone, obstructions and zoning laws - Stop way, clearway.

Aprons: factors controlling size and number of gate positions - holding apron aircraft parking systems – passenger terminal building- typical airport layout - airport markings - marking of runways, taxiways etc. Airport lighting: lighting of runways approaches, taxiways and aprons. Air traffic control - airways, navigational aids and landing aids.

References

1.	S. K. Khanna, C. E. G. Justo, Highway engineering, Nem Chand Publications. 

2.	L .R. Kadiyali, Traffic Engineering and Transport Planning, Khanna Publishers. 
3.	L.R. Kadiyali, Principles and Practices of Highway Engineering, Khanna Publishers. 
4.	S.K. Khanna, M. G. Arora, S.S. Jain, Airport Planning & Design, Nem Chand 
Publishers
4.	S. C. Rangwala, Airport Engg., Charotar Publishing Co. 
5.	Horenjeft, Robert & Francise Mc Kelvy, Planning and design of airports, Mc Graw Hill 
6.	G.V. Rao, Principles of transportation and High way Engineering, Tata Mc Graw Hill, New Delhi. 

7.	Robert. G. Hennes, Martin Ekse, Fundamentals of Transportation engineering, Tata Mc Graw Hill. 
8.	Theodore M Matson, Wilbur. S. Smith, Frederick.W.Hurd, Traffic Engineering, Mc Graw Hill. 
