CS 010 406: Theory of Computation
(Common with IT010 404)

Teaching scheme Credits: 4 3 hours lecture and 1 hour tutorial per week

Objectives

•	To impart the basic concepts of theory of automata ,languages and computation. 
•	To develop understanding about machines for sequential computation, formal languages and grammars , and classification of feasible and intractable problems. 


Module I (10 hours)

Proving techniques-Mathematical induction -Diagonalization principle –Pigeonhole principle-Functions – Primitive recursive and partial recursive functions – Computable and non computable functions—-Formal representation of languages – Chomsky Classification.

Module II (13 hours)

Introduction to Automata theory – Definition of Automation – Finite Automata –Language acceptability by Finite Automata –Deterministic and Nondeterministic finite automation-Regular Expressions – Finite Automation with ?-Transitions –Conversion of NFA to DFA - Minimisation of DFA-DFA to Regular Expressions conversion-pumping lemma for regular languages – Applications of finite automata-NFA with o/p ( moore /mealy)

Module III (12 hours)

Context Free Grammar –Simplification of CFG-Normal forms-Chomsky Normal form and Greibach Normal form- pumping lemma for Context free languages- Applications of PDA - Pushdown Automata – Formal definition – Language acceptability by PDA through empty stack and final state – Deterministic and nondeterministic PDA – designing of PDA-

Module IV (13 hours)

Turing Machines – Formal definition – Language acceptability by TM –TM as acceptors, Transducers - designing of TM- Two way infinite TM- Multi tape TM - Universal Turing Machines- Church’s Thesis-Godelization.- - Time complexity of TM - Halting Problem -

Rice theorem - Post correspondence problem-Linear Bounded Automata.

Module V (12 hours)

Complexity classes- Tractable problems– Class P –P Complete-Reduction problem-Context grammar nonempty-Intractable problems- Class NP – NP Complete- Cooks theorem-Reduction problems-SAT-Clique-Hamiltonian-TSP-Vertex Cover-NP Hard problems.
.

Reference Books

1.	K.L.P. Mishra, N. Chandrashekharan , Theory of Computer Science , Prentice Hall of India 
2.	Michael Sipser, Introduction to the Theory of Computation, Cengage Learning,New Delhi,2007 
3.	Harry R Lewis, Christos H Papadimitriou, Elements of the theory of computation, Pearson Education Asia, 
4.	Rajendra Kumar,Theory of Automata Language & Computation,Tata McGraw Hill,New Delhi,2010 
5.	Wayne Goddard, Introducing Theory of Computation, Jones & Bartlett India,New Delhi2010 
6.	Bernard M Moret: The Theory of Computation, Pearson Education 
7.	John Hopcroft, Rajeev Motwani & Jeffry Ullman: Introduction to Automata Theory Languages & Computation , Pearson Edn 
8.	Raymond Greenlaw,H. James Hoover, Fundamentals of Theory of Computation,Elsevier,Gurgaon,Haryana,2009 
9.	John C Martin, Introducing to languages and The Theory of Computation, 3rd Edition, Tata McGraw Hill,New Delhi,2010 
10.	Kamala Krithivasan, Rama R, Introduction to Formal Languages,Automata Theory and Computation, Pearson Education Asia,2009 
11.	Rajesh K. Shukla, Theory of Computation, Cengage Learning, New Delhi,2009 
12.	K V N Sunitha, N Kalyani: Formal Languages and Automata Theory, Tata McGraw Hill,New Delhi,2010 
13.	S. P. Eugene Xavier, Theory of Automata Formal Language & Computation,New Age International, New Delhi ,2004 
