CS010 404 SIGNALS AND COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS

Teaching scheme	Credits: 4

3 hours lecture and 1 hour tutorial per week

Objectives:-

To introduce the fundamentals of Analog and Digital Signals ,their properties and introduce the relevant transforms used in Communication.
To familiarize the core ideas of Communication Engineering which in turn adds to the study of Computer Communication.


Module 1 (15 hrs):-

Introduction to Signals:- Continuous Time Signals- Discrete Time Signals- Signal Operations- Properties of Signals(Periodicity and Symmetry), Frequency Domain Representation of Continuous Time Signals-Continuous Time Fourier Series(CTFS)- Definition- properties-Examples, Continuous Time Fourier Transform(CTFT)- Definition- Properties – Examples-Concept of Frequency Spectrum, Sampling- The Sampling Theorem(proof not required)-Quantisation

Module 2 (12 hrs):-

Communication Systems:- Architecture of a Typical Communication System – Basic problems in Signal Transmission - Noise – Types of Noise- Internal and External Noise, Cross Talk- Typical parameters of Communication Systems- Signal propagation Delay, Signal to Noise Ratio, Attenuation, Bandwidth
Communication Channels:- Twisted Pairs- Coaxial Cables- Fiber Optic Cables- Capacity of a Noisy Channel- Shannon Hartley Theorem

Module 3: (15 Hrs)

Modulation- Need for Modulation
Analog Modulation- Types of analog modulation- Amplitude Modulation, Frequency modulation, Phase modulation, Pulse Modulation Schemes- Pulse Amplitude modulation(PAM), Pulse Width Modulation(PWM), Pulse Position Modulation(PPM), Pulse Code Modulation(PCM),Delta modulation, Sample problems based on different modulation methods.
Digital modulation;- Amplitude Shift Keying(ASK), Frequency Shift keying(FSK),Phase Shift Keying(PSK), Quadrature Amplitude modulation (QAM), Differential Phase Shift Keying(DPSK)

Module 4: (8 Hrs)
 
Multiplexing: -Time Division Multiplexing(TDM)- Frequency Division Multiplexing(FDM)- Wavelength Division multiplexing(WDM)
Switching:- Circuit, Packet and Message Switching Schemes, Case Study:- SONET( Basic ideas only)- Datagrams and virtual Circuits
Digital Transmission:- Analog to Digital Converter(ADC), Serial and parallel Transmission- Simplex, Half Duplex and Full Duplex Transmissions.

Module 5: (10 Hrs)

Error Correction and Detection;- Line Coding Schemes- Block Coding- Convolution Coding- Hamming Codes
Transmission Codes:- Different Character Codes- ASCII, EBCDIC, Baudot Code, Bar Coding, Parity Coding

Reference Books

1.	S.Haykin and B. V. Veen, Signals and Systems, John Wiley & Sons, N. Y., 2002 

2.	George Kennedy, Bernard Davis - Electronic Communication Systems-Tata McGraw Hill 
3.	Behrouz Forouzan- Data Communication and Networking- Tata McGraw Hill 

4.	Michael J Roberts, Govind Sharma- Fundamentals of Signals and Systems-Tata McGraw Hill 
5.	William Stallings- Data and Computer Communications- Prentice Hall of India 
6.	Fred Halsall- Digital Communication, Computer Networks and Open Systems Pearson Education 
7.	Taub and Schilling – Principles of Communication Systems- Tata McGraw Hill 

8.	Kolimbiris H.- Digital Communication Systems- Pearson Education 
