CS010 503: Database Management Systems

(Common with IT010 506)

Teaching scheme Credits: 4 2 hours lecture and 2 hours tutorial per week

Objectives

•	To impart an introduction to the theory and practice of database systems. 
•	To develop basic knowledge on data modelling and design of efficient relations. 
•	To provide exposure to oracle database programming. 


Module I	(10 hours)

Basic Concepts - Purpose of Database Systems- 3 Schema Architecture and Data Independence- Components of DBMS –Data Models, Schemas and Instances-Data Modeling using the Entity Relationship Model-Entity types, Relationship Types, Weak Entity Types .

Module II	(14 hours)

Relational  Model  Concepts  –Constraints  –  Entity  Integrity  and  Referential  Integrity,
Relational Algebra -Select, Project, Operations from Set Theory, Join, OuterJoin and Division - Tuple Relational Calculus.
SQL- Data Definition with SQL - Insert, Delete and Update Statements in SQL, Defining Domains, Schemas and Constraints, Constraint Violations - Basic Queries in SQL - Select Statement, Use of Aggregate functions and Group Retrieval, Nested Queries, Correlated Queries – Views.

Module III	(12 hours)

Oracle Case Study : The Basic Structure of the Oracle System – Database Structure and its Manipulation in Oracle - Storage Organization in Oracle.- Programming in PL/SQL- Cursor in PL/SQL - Assertions – Triggers.

Indexing and Hashing Concepts -: Ordered Indices, Hash Indices, Dense and Sparse Indices, Multi Level Indices, Cluster Index, Dynamic Hashing.

Module IV	(11 hours)

Database Design– Design Guidelines– Relational Database Design – Functional Dependency- Determination of Candidate Keys, Super Key, Foreign Key, Normalization using Functional Dependencies, Normal Forms based on Primary keys- General Definitions of First, Second and Third Normal Forms. Boyce Codd Normal Form– Multi -valued Dependencies and Forth Normal Form – Join Dependencies and Fifth Normal Form – Pitfalls in Relational Database Design.

Module V	(13 hours)

Introduction to Transaction Processing- Transactions- ACID Properties of Transactions-Schedules- Serializability of Schedules- Precedence Graph- Concurrency Control – Locks and Timestamps-Database Recovery

Query processing and Optimization- Translating SQL Queries into a Relational Algebra Computing Select, Project and Join
Object Relational Databases-Distributed Databases-Different Types-Fragmentation and Replication Techniques-Functions of DDBMS.
 
Reference Books

1.Elmsari and Navathe, Fundamentals of Database System, Pearson Education Asia, 5th Edition, New Delhi, 2008. 
2.Henry F Korth, Abraham Silbershatz , Database System Concepts, Mc Graw Hill 6td Edition, Singapore, 2011. 
3.Elmsari and Navathe, Fundamentals of Database System, Pearson Education Asia, 3rd Edition, New Delhi,2005, for oracle 
4.Alexis Leon and Mathews Leon, Database Management Systems, Leon vikas Publishers, New Delhi. 
5.Narayanan S, Umanath and Richard W.Scamell, Data Modelling and Database Design,Cengage Learning, New Delhi, 2009. 
6.S.K Singh,Database Systems Concepts,Design and Applications, Pearson Education Asia, New Delhi, 2006.
7. Pranab Kumar Das Gupta, Datbase management System Oracle SQL And PL/SQL, Easter Economy Edition, New Delhi, 2009
8. C.J.Date , An Introduction to Database Systems, Pearson Education Asia, 7th Edition, New Delhi.
9.Rajesh Narang, Database Management Systems, Asoke K ghosh , PHI Learning, New Delhi, 2009. 
10.Ramakrishnan and Gehrke, Database Management Systems, Mc Graw Hill, 3rd Edition , 2003. 
11.Peter Rob and Carlos Coronel, Database Systems, Thomson Course Technology, 7th Edition, 2007.
12.Satinder Bal Guptha and Adithya Mittal, Introduction to Database Management System, University Science Publishers, New Delhi, 2010. 
13.Patrick O’Neil and Elizabeth O’Neil, Database Principles, Programming and Performance, Morgan Kaufmann, 2nd Edition, New Delhi,2010 . 
14.Ramon A Mata-Toledo and Pauline K Cushman, Schaum’s OUTlines Database Management Systems, Tata Mc Graw Hill , New Delhi, 2007. 
15.Michel Kifer, Philip M. Lewis, Prabin K .Panigrahi and Arthur Bernstein, Database Systems An Application Oriented Approach, Pearson Education Asia, 2ndEdition,NewDelhi
 
