CS010 606L03: User Interface Design

Teaching scheme Credits: 4 2 hours lecture and 2 hours tutorial per week


Objectives

•	To impart the basic concepts of User Interface Design. 
•	To develop understanding about human computer interaction methods that utilize more general, widespread and easier-to-learn capabilities. 


Module I (8 hours)

Introduction: Importance of user interface – definition, importance of good design, brief history – Graphical User Interface – Web User Interface – Theories, Principles and Guidelines of User interface design

Module II (10 hours)

Design Process: Obstacles in development path deigning for people -Understanding Human Interaction with computers, Importance of Human Characteristics, Human consideration, Human Interaction speeds – Understanding Business function

Module III (15 hours)

Screen Designing: Design goals - screen meaning and purpose, organizing screen elements-ordering of screen data and content – screen navigation and flow – visually pleasing composition – amount of information – focus and emphasis – presenting information simply and meaningfully – information retrieval on web – Statistical graphics – Technological considerations in Interface Design.

Module IV (15 hours)

Menus and navigation schemes-structures of menus-functions of menus- contents of menus - formatting of menus – phrasing the menu- selecting menu choices-navigating menus-kinds of graphical menus- Selection of windows-Window characteristics-components of window-window presentation styles-types of windows -window management-organising window functions-window operations -Selection of device based and screen based controls - text and messages – icons and images – Multimedia – colours- uses, problems, choosing colours.

Module V (12 hours)

Distributed and Collaborative Interaction-Device consistency-distribution of the user interface-event distribution-graphical package layer-programmable API-Model semantics distribution-data layer distribution- asynchronous collaboration-Software tools-specification methods- interface building tools –evaluation and critiquing tools-Interaction devices-keyboard and function keys - pointing devices- speech recognition, digitization and generation – image and video displays – printers.


Reference Books	Guide  to  User  Interface  Design,  2nd   Edn.,  Wiley	

1.  Wilbert  O.  Galitz,The  Essential Dreamtech,Delhi,2002		
2.	Ben Shneiderman, Designing the User Interface ,3rd Edn., Pearson Education Asia,Delhi,2002 
3.	Dan R. Olsen, Human Computer Interaction,Cengage,New Delhi,2009 
4.	John M. Carroll,Human Computer Interaction, Pearson Education Asia, Delhi,2002 
5.	Alan Cooper, The Essentials of User Interface Design , Wiley Dreamtech, Delhi,2002 
