CS010 706L03: Operating System Kernel Design

( common to IT010 706L05 Operating System Kernel Design )

Teaching scheme Credits: 4 2 hours lecture and 2 hours tutorial per week


Objectives

•	To provide knowledge about the operating system working principles. 

•	To discuss most of the significant data structures and algorithms used in the kernel. 


Module I (13 hours)

Basic Operating System Concepts – Kernel – Types: monolithic, microkernel – An Overview of Unix Kernels-The Process/Kernel Model, Reentrant Kernels – Signals sending and receiving – System calls – System Call Handler and Service Routines - Interrupts and Exceptions - Interrupt Handling - The Timer Interrupt Handler.

Module II (13 hours)

Processes - Process Descriptor - Process State, Process relationship – Creating Processes - Process Termination - Process Scheduling – Scheduling algorithm – SMP Scheduler.
Kernel Synchronization - Synchronization Techniques - Process Communication - System V IPC.

Module III (10 hours)

Paging in Linux - Memory Management - Page Frame Management - The Buddy System Algorithm - The Process's Address Space - The Memory Descriptor - Memory Regions - Page Fault Exception Handler.

Module IV (14 hours)

Overview of the Unix File System - The Virtual File System - role of the VFS - VFS Data Structures – File system Mounting.
The Ext2 File system - Disk Data Structures - Creating the File system - Data Blocks Addressing - Allocating a Data Block.

Module V (10 hours)

Managing I/O Devices - Associating Files with I/O Devices - Device Drivers - Character Device - Block Device.
Disk Caches - Buffer Cache - Writing Dirty Buffers to Disk - Page Cache.




Reference Books

1)	Daniel P. Bovet, Marco Cesati, Understanding the Linux Kernel, First ed., O'Reilly, 2000 
2)	M Bech et al., Linux Kernel Internals, 2nd ed., Addison-Wesley, 1998 
3)	Maurice J. Bach, The Design of the Unix Operating System, First Edition, Pearson Education, 1999. 
4)	Abraham Silberschatz, Peter B.Galvin and Greg Gagne, “Operating System Concepts”, John  Wiley & Sons Inc, 8th Edition 2010.
