CS010 805G04: Software Architecture

(Common to IT010 805G01  Software Architecture )

Teaching scheme	Credits: 4

2 hours lecture and 2 hour tutorial per week

Objectives

•	To understand the role of a software architecture in the development of an enterprise application system. 
•	To develop the ability to understand the models that are used to document a software architecture. 

Module I	(13 hours)

Software Architecture —Software Architecture, Software Design Levels, The status of Software Engineering and Architecture.

Architecture Styles—Use of Patterns and Styles in Software Design, Common Architectural Styles -Pipes and Filters, Data Abstraction and Object Orientation, Event Based Implicit Invocation, Layered Systems, Repositories, Interpreters, Process Control Paradigms—Case Studies to Illustrate the use of Architectural Principles.

Module II	(11 hours)

Architectural Design—Guidelines for User Interface Architectures, Design Space and Rules, Applying Design Space with an Example, A Validation Experiment. The Quantified Design Space—Background, Quantified Design Space.

Module III    (11 hours)

Formal models and Specifications— Formalizing the Architecture of a Specific System-Architectural Formalism and its Applications, Formalizing Various Architectural Styles, Filters, Pipes, Pipe-and-Filter System, Formalizing Architectural Design Space.

Module IV	(14 hours)

Architectural Description Languages—Requirements for Architectural Description Languages, The Linguistic Character of Architectural Description, Desiderata for Architecture Description Languages, Problems.

First-Class Connectors—Current practice, Software System Composition . Adding Implicit Invocation to Traditional Programming Languages

Module V	(11 hours)

Architectural Design Tools— UniCon A Universal Connecting Language, Components, Abstraction and Encapsulation, Types and Type checking.

Architectural Design - Exploiting Styles , Architectural Interconnection


References

1.	Mary Shaw & David Garlan,” Software Architecture”, Prentice Hall India Private Limited, Third Edition, New Delhi, 2000. 

2.	Len Bass, Paul Clements, & Rick Kazman, “Software Architecture in Practice”, Pearson Education. 
