EC010 405 ANALOG COMMUNICATION

Teaching scheme Credits: 4 3 hours lecture and 1 hour tutorial per week


Objectives:

•	Present an introduction to linear and non linear modulation and circuits. 

•	Familiarize students with the basics of probability theory and noise in communication system. 

•	Introduce students to telephone system 


Module 1(12 hrs)

Introduction:	Block diagram of communication system –need for modulation

Linear Modulation: Mathematical representation of AM- frequency spectrum - Power relations, SSB, VSB and ISB (Basics only)

Angle Modulation: FM and PM, Spectrum of FM signal, Power and Bandwidth of FM signals, Comparison of AM- FM- PM.

Module 2 (12 hrs)

Linear Modulators and Demodulators: Diode and Transistor Modulator, Square Law Detector Envelope Detector.

Generation and Detection of DSB-SC signal :-Balanced Modulator, Ring Modulator, Synchronous Detection.

SSB-SC generation:-Filter method, Phase shift method, Detection of SSB- Product demodulator

Module 3 (12 hrs)

Non Linear modulators and Demodulators:-FM Generation: Direct and Indirect methods, FM Detection:-Simple slope, balanced slope detection, Foster –Seeley detection, Ratio Detection Radio Transmitters and Receivers:- AM transmitters:-High level and Low level, Receivers:-characteristics of receivers, Super heterodyne receiver, Image frequency rejection, choice of intermediate frequency, mixer, AGC .

FM Stereo Transmitter and Receiver.

Module 4  (12 hrs)

Probability and Random Variables: -Probability, Sample Space, Events, Conditional Probability and Statistical Independence, Bayes’ Theorem, Discrete And Continuous Random Variables, CDF and PDF Joint and Conditional PDF, Statistical Averages: Means, Moments, Expectation Probability models: Binomial Distribution, Gaussian Distribution, Rayleigh Distribution


Module 5   (12 hrs)

Noise:- Sources of noise, shot noise, resistor noise, white noise, additive noise, noise bandwidth, noise temperature, noise figure, signal to noise ratio, noise for cascaded stages
 



Telephone Systems - Telephone subscribers loop system, switching and transmission plan, Transmission system, Signalling techniques, Interchannel signalling, common channel signalling, standard telephone set, telephone call procedures, call progress.



References

1.	LE Frenzel, Principles of Electronic Communication System 3rd Edition, Tata Mc.GrawHill. 

2.	Kennedy,Davis  , Electronic Communication systems 4th   Edition ,Tata Mc.GrawHill. 
3.	D Roddy and J Coolen: Electronic Communications, Prentice Hall of India. 

4.	RP Singh ,S D Sapre ,Communication System, Analog &Digital, Tata Mc.Graw Hill 

5.	AB Carlson,PB Crilly,JC Rutledge, Communication Systems 4th  Edition, Mc.GrawHill 
6.	Wayne Tomasi ,Electronic communication Systems 5th  Edition, Pearson Edn 

7.	RJ Shoenbeck ,Electronic communication ,Modulation & Transmission. Prentice Hall of India. 

8.	ThiagarajanViswanathan, Telecommunication Switching systems and Networks, Prentice Hall of India. 

9.	Simon Haykin ,Communication System,Wiley 
