EC010 805 G01 TEST ENGINEERING

Teaching Schemes	Credits : 4

2 hrs lecture and 2 hrs tutorial per week

Objectives

1.	To provide an insight into multi-disciplinary approach to test engineering including test economics and management. 

2.	To understand practical, concise descriptions of the methods and technologies in modern mechanical, electronics and software testing. 

3.	To provide an insight into the developing interface between modern design analysis methods and testing practice. 

4.	To understand why products and systems fail, which testing methods are appropriate to each stage of the product life cycle and how testing can reduce failures. 
5.	To provide an overview of international testing regulations and standards. 

Module 1 (12 hrs)

Introduction: need for test, analysis and simulation, good and bad testing, test economics, managing the test programme

Stress, Strength and Failure of Materials: mechanical stress and fracture, temperature effects, wear corrosion, humidity and condensation, materials and component selection

Electrical and Electronics Stress, Strength and Failure: stress effects, component types and failure mechanisms, circuit and system aspects

Module 2 (12 hrs)

Variation and Reliability: variation in engineering, load-strength interference, time-dependent variation, multiple variations and statistical experiments, discrete variations, confidence and significance, reliability

Design Analysis: Quality Function Deployment, design analysis methods, analysis methods for reliability and safety, design analysis for processes, software for design analysis, limitations of design analysis, using analysis results for test planning

Module 3 (12 hrs)

Development Testing Principles: functional testing, testing for reliability and durability, testing for variation, process testing, ‘Beta’ testing

Materials and Systems Testing: materials, assemblies and systems, system aspects, data collection and analysis, standard test methods, test centres

Testing Electronics: circuit test principles, test equipment, test data acquisition, design for test, electronic component test, EMI / EMC testing

Module 4 (12 hrs)

Software: software in engineering systems, software errors, preventing errors, analysis of software system design, data reliability, managing software testing

Manufacturing Test: manufacturing test principles, manufacturing test economics, inspection and measurement, test methods, stress screening, electronics manufacturing test options and economics, testing electronic components, statistical process control and acceptance sampling
Testing in Service: in-service test economics, test schedules, mechanical and systems, electronic and electrical, sotaftware, reliability centred maintenance, stress screening of repaired items, calibration


Module 5 (12 hrs)

Data Collection and Analysis: FRACAS, acceptance sampling, probability and hazard plotting, time series analysis, software for data collection and analysis, reliability demonstration and growth measurement, sources of data

Laws, Regulations and Standards: safety and product liability, main regulatory agencies in USA, Europe and Asia, International standards, BIS, ISO standards, industry / technology standards

Management: organization and responsibilities, procedures for test, development test programme, project test plan, training and education for test, future of test.


References:

1.	Patrick D. T. O’connor, “A Concise Guide to Cost-effective Design, Development and Manufacture”, John Wiley & Sons, 2001 
2.	Patrick D. T. O’connor, “Practical Reliability Engineering”, Wiley India, 2008 
3.	Naikan V. N. A., “Reliabilty Engineering and Life Testing”, PHI Learning, 2008 
4.	Kapur K. C., Lamberson L. R., “Reliability in Engineering Design”, Wiley India, 2009 
5.	Srinath L. S., “Reliability Engineering”, East West Press, 2005 
