EC010 606 L01: DATA STRUCTURES AND ALGORITHMS

Teaching scheme Credits: 4 3 hours lecture and 1 hour tutorial per week


Objectives
•	To impart the basic concepts of data structures and algorithms. 

•	To develop understanding about writing algorithms and solving problems with the help of fundamental data structures using object oriented concepts. 


Module I (10 hours)

Introduction to Data Structures, arrays, records, stacks, queue, linked list, linked stacks and queues, doubly linked list. Polynomial representation using arrays and lists.

Module II (12hours)

Trees, binary tree, traversals, binary search tree, creation insertion, deletion, searching. Graph:-representation, depth first search, breadth first search, path finding.

Module III (12hours)

Search algorithms, sequential binary interpolation, sorting, insertion, bubble, radix, quick sort, merge sort, and heat sort.

Module IV (14 hours)

Analysis of algorithms: - Time and space complexity, complexity notations, best, worst, average cases.

Algorithmic techniques-brute force, greedy, divide and conquer, dynamic programming

Module V (12 hours)

Analysis of search algorithms, sort algorithms. P and NP problems, travelling sales man problems.

Reference Books

1.	Horowitz ,Sahni & Anderson Freed, Fundamentals of Data Structures in C, 2nd ed., Universities Press, Hyderabad, 2009 

2.	Sartaj Sahni , Data Structures, Algorithms and Applications in C++ , 2nd ed., Universities Press, Hyderabad, 2009 

3.	Michael T Goodrich, Roberto Tamassia, David Mount, Data Structures and Algorithms in C++, Wiley India Edition, New Delhi, 2009 

4.	B.M. Harwani, Data Structures and Algorithms in C++, Dreamtech Press, New Delhi, 2010 

5.	Langsam, Augenstein ,Tanenbaum, Data Structures in C & C++ , 2nd Edition, Pearson Education. 

6.	John Hopcroft, Rajeev Motwani & Jeffry Ullman, Introduction to Automata Theory, Languages & Computation, Pearson Education. 

7.	Tremblay & Sorenson, Introduction to Data Structures with Applications, Tata Mc Graw Hill 

8.	Sara Baase & Allen Van Gelder ,Computer Algorithms – Introduction to Design and Analysis , Pearson Education 
9.	Sahni, Data Structures algorithms and applications , Tata Mc GrHill 
