EC010 404: DIGITAL ELECTRONICS

Teaching scheme	Credits: 4
3hours lecture and 1 hour tutorial per week.

Objectives

•	To Work with a variety of number systems and numeric representations, including signed and unsigned binary, hexadecimal, 2’s complement. 

•	To introduce basic postulates of Boolean algebra and show the correlation between Boolean expression. 
•	To introduce the methods for simplifying Boolean expressions. 

•	To outline the formal procedures for the analysis and design of combinational circuits and sequential circuits. 

Module I (12hours)

Positional Number System: Binary, Octal, Decimal, Hexadecimal number system, Number base conversions, complements - signed magnitude binary numbers - Binary Arithmetic- addition, subtraction - Binary codes- Weighted, BCD, 8421, Gray code, Excess 3 code, ASCII, Error detecting and correcting code, parity, hamming code.

Boolean postulates and laws with proof, De-Morgan’s Theorems, Principle of Duality, Minimization of Boolean expressions, Sum of Products (SOP), Product of Sums (POS), Canonical forms, Karnaugh map Minimization, Don’t care conditions

Module II (12 hours)

Digital Circuits: Positive and Negative logic, Transistor transistor logic, TTL with totem pole, open collector and tri state output, Emitter coupled logic – basic ECL inverter, NMOS NOR gate, CMOS inverter, NAND and NOR, Gate performance parameters – fan in, fan out, propagation delay, noise margin, power dissipation for each logic, characteristics of TTL and CMOS, subfamilies of TTL and CMOS.

Module III (12 hours)

Introduction to Combinational Circuits: Basic logic gates, Universal gates, Realization of Boolean functions using universal gates, Realization of combinational functions: addition – half and full adder – n bit adder – carry look ahead adder, subtraction, comparison, code conversion, and decoder, encoder, multiplexer, demultiplexer, parity checkers, and parity generator.

Introduction to Sequential Circuits: latches, timing, Flip Flops, types, characteristic equations, excitation tables, Realization of one flip flop using other flip flops.

Module IV (12 hours)

Application of flip flops as bounce elimination switch, register, counter and RAM, Binary ripple counter, synchronous binary counter, Design of modulo ‘n’ synchronous counter, up/down counters,

Shift registers – SISO, SIPO, PISO, PIPO, bidirectional shift register and universal register, counters based on shift registers

Module V (12 hours)

Hazards in combinational circuits: Static hazard, dynamic hazard, essential hazards, hazard free combinational circuits.

Introduction to programmable logic devices: PLA- block diagram, PAL – block diagram, registered PAL, Configurable PAL, GAL - architecture, CPLD –
 



Syllabus - B.Tech. Electronics & Communication Engg.
 
Mahatma Gandhi University


classification internal architecture, FPGA - architecture, ASIC – categories , full custom and semi custom.


Reference Books

1.	Donald D Givone, Digital Principles and Design, Tata McGraw Hill, 2003. 
2.	G K Kharate, Digital Electronics, Oxford university press, 2010 
3.	Ronald J Tocci, Digital Systems, Pearson Education, 10th edition 2009. 
4.	Thomas L Floyd, Digital Fundamentals, Pearson Education, 8th edition, 2003. 

5.	Donald P Leach, Albert Paul Malvino, Digital Principles and Applications, Tata McGraw Hill 6th edition, 2006. 
6.	Charles H.Roth, Fundamentals of Logic Design, Thomson Publication Company 5th edition, 2004. 

7.	Milos Ercegovac, Introduction to Digital Systems, Wiley India, 2010 
8.	Moris mano, Digital Design, Prentice Hall of India, 3rd edition, 2002. 
9.	Anada kumar, Fundamentals of Digital Circuits, Prentice Hall of India, 2008. 
10.	Brain Holdesworth, Digital Logic Design, Elsevier, 4th edition, 2002. 
