EC010 604: COMPUTER ARCHITECTURE AND PARALLEL
PROCESSING

Teaching scheme Credits: 4 3 hours lecture and 1 hour tutorial per week


Objectives
•	To impart the basic concepts of architecture and organisation of computers 
•	To develop understanding about pipelining and parallel processing techniques. 
•	To impart knowledge about the current PC hardware 

Pre-requisites:  Digital Electronics and Microprocessors

Module I (12 hours)

Introduction : Difference between Architecture, Organisation and Hardware, Review of basic operational concepts – Stored program concept, Instruction sequencing, bus structure, Software support- translating and executing a program- assembler, linker, loader, OS, Instruction types and Addressing modes.

CPU Performance and its factors, Performance evaluation, The Power wall, Switch from uniprocessors to multiprocessors, Basic concepts of pipelining, superscalar architecture and multithreading, Instruction level parallelism (basic idea only).

Module II (12 hours)

Processor Organisation: Control Unit design: Execution of a complete instruction, Single bus and multibus organisation, Sequencing of control signals, Hardwired control unit, Microprogrammed control unit.

Arithmetic and logic design – review of signed and unsigned binary arithmetic, fast adders, Array multiplier, sequential multiplier, Booth’s algorithm, fast multiplication methods, integer division – restoring and non restoring methods, floating point numbers.

Module III (12 hours)

Memory and I/O Organisation Memory hierarchy, Memory characteristics, Internal organization of semiconductor RAM memories, Static and Dynamic RAM memories, flash memory, Cache memory – mapping function, replacement algorithm, measurement and improvement of cache performance, Virtual memory and address translation, MMU.

Secondary memories – magnetic and optical disks, I/O accessing – Programmed, Interrupt driven and DMA , Buses- synchronous and asynchronous, bus standards.

Module IV (12 hours)

Parallel Processing :Enhancing performance with pipelining-overview, Designing instruction set for pipelining, pipelined datapath, Hazards in pipelining.

Flynn’s classification, Multicore processors and Multithreading, Multiprocessor systems-Interconnection networks, Multicomputer systems, Clusters and other message passing architecture.
 

Module V (12 hours)

PC Hardware: Today’s PC architecture – block diagram, Familiarisation of PC hardware components.

Processor - Pentium series to higher processors - single core, hyperthreading, dual core, multi core and many core processors (brief idea about evolution and improvements in performance)

Motherboard – Typical architecture , Essential Chipsets, Sockets, Slots and ports – serial, parallel, USB, RAM , Brief idea about buses, Subsystems (Network, Sound and Graphics, Ethernet port),

Storage devices : Hard Disks-Types and Classification based on interface- Optical Storage – CD, DVD, BLURAY

SMPS – Functions, power connectors. Typical specifications for a computer

Reference Books

1.	Carl Hamacher  : “Computer Organization ”, Fifth Edition, Mc Graw Hill. 

2.	David A. Patterson and John L.Hennessey, “Computer Organisation and Design”, Fourth Edition, Morgan Kaufmann. 

3.	William Stallings : “Computer Organisation and Architecture”, Pearson Education. 

4.	John P Hayes : “Computer Architecture and Organisation”, Mc Graw Hill. 

5.	Andrew S Tanenbaum : “Structured Computer Organisation”, Pearson Education. 

6.	Craig Zacker : “PC Hardware : The Complete Reference”, TMH. 
7.	Nicholas P Carter : “Computer Architecture and Organization”, Mc Graw Hill. 

8.	Pal Chaudhari: “Computer Organisation and Design”, Prentice hall of India. 
 
