
EC010  502 CONTROL SYSTEMS

Teaching Scheme

2 hours lecture and 2 hours tutorial per week.	Credit :4

Objectives

•	To develop the basic understanding of control system theory and its role in engineering design. 

•	To familiarize the inputs, outputs, and building blocks of a control system; to differentiate between open-loop and closed-loop control systems. 

•	To understand the utility of Laplace transforms and transfer functions for modeling complex interconnected systems. 

•	To understand the concept of poles and zeros of a transfer function and how they affect the physical behavior of a system. 

•	To understand the concept of Time Domain and Frequency Domain analysis and to determine the physical behavior of systems using these analysis. 

•	To understand state variable analysis of systems and the relationship with state variable representation and transfer functions. 

Module 1 (14 hours)

Introduction to Control Systems – Basic building blocks of a Control System – Open-Loop and Closed-Loop Control Systems – Feedback and effects of feedback – Types of feedback Control Systems – LTI Systems.

Impulse Response and Transfer Functions of LTI Systems – Properties of Transfer Functions – SISO and MIMO Systems – Mathematical modeling of electrical and mechanical systems (simple systems only) – Analogy between mechanical and electrical systems.

Block Diagrams – Reduction of Block Diagrams – Signal Flow Graph – Mason’s Gain Formula – Conversion of Block Diagrams to Signal Flow Graphs.

Module 2 (14 hours)

Stability of Linear Control Systems – BIBO Stability and Asymptotic Stability – Relationship between characteristic equation roots and stability – Method of determining stability – Routh-Hurwitz Criterion.

Time-Domain Analysis of Control Systems – Transient Response and Steady-State Response – Typical test signals – Unit-Step response and Time-Domain specifications of first-order and prototype second-order systems – Steady-State Error – Static and Dynamic Error Constants.

Effects of adding poles and zeros to the Transfer Function – Dominant Poles and Insignificant Poles of Transfer Functions.

Module 3 (10 hours)

Root-Locus Technique – Basic properties of the Root Loci – Angle and Magnitude conditions – Rules for the construction of approximate Root Loci.

Control System Design by the Root-Locus Method – Preliminary design considerations – Lead Compensation – Lag Compensation – Lead-Lag Compensation – Parallel Compensation.

Module 4 (12 hours)

Frequency-Domain Analysis of Control Systems – Frequency-Domain specifications of prototype second order system – Effects of adding zeros and poles to the Forward-Path Transfer Function.
 
Nyquist Stability Criterion: Fundamentals – Relationship between the Root Loci and the Nyquist Plot.

Relative Stability – Gain Margin and Phase Margin – Stability analysis with Bode Plot and Polar Plot

– Introduction to Nichols Plot, Constant-M & Constant-N circles and Nichols Chart (no analysis required).

Module 5 (10 hours)

State-Variable Analysis of Control Systems – Vector-Matrix representation of State Equations – State-Transition Matrix – State-Transition Equation – Relationship between State Equations and Higher-Order differential equations – Relationship between State Equations and Transfer Functions - Characteristic Equation, Eigen values and Eigen vectors.

References

1.	B. C. Kuo, Automatic Control Systems, 7th ed., PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 2009. 

2.	K. Ogata, Modern Control Engineering, 5th ed., PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 2010. 

3.	R. C. Dorf, R. H. Bishop, Modern Control Systems, 11th ed., Pearson Education, New Delhi, 2008. 

4.	N. S. Nise, Control Systems Engineering, 5th ed., Wiley India Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 2009. 

5.	M. Gopal, Control Systems: Principles and Design, 3rd ed., Tata McGraw Hill Education Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 2008. 
