EC010 703 MICROWAVE ENGINEERING

Teaching Schemes	Credit : 3
2 hours lecture and 1 hour tutorial per week.


Objectives

•	To give the basic ideas about the characteristics and applications of microwave frequency bands 

•	To understand the working of various microwave passive and active devices and circuits 

Module 1: (12 hours)

Microwave network Characterization and passive devices: Characteristic, features and applications of microwaves- Circuit and S parameter representation of N port microwave networks - Reciprocity Theorem- Lossless networks and unitary conditions- ABCD parameters-Cascaded networks-Relations between S- Y and ABCD parameters. Properties and s-matrices for typical network such as section of uniform transmission line, 3-port networks (reciprocal and nonreciprocal), T-junctions directional coupler, magic tee, ferrite devices, isolator, circulators.

Module 2 :(15 hours)

Microwave Tubes: Generation of microwaves by tubes, limitations of conventional tubes, klystron amplifiers - analysis, reflex klystron oscillator-analysis, magnetrons, traveling wave tube (TWT), backward wave oscillator (BWO)-basic principles. Millimetre wave tubes-introduction

Module 3: (13 hours)

Microwave semiconductor: High frequency limitations of transistors, microwave transistors (theory only), Manley Rowe relations, parameteric amplifiers and frequency multipliers, tunnel diodes, Gunn effect, Gunn Diode oscillators, Avalanche effect, IMPATT & TRAPATT diodes, PIN diodes and their applications, Schottky barrier and backward diodes.

Module 4: (10 hours)

Microwave Measurements: VSWR measurement, microwave power measurement, impedance measurement, frequency measurement, measurement of scattering parameters Return loss measurement using directional couplres-introduction to vector network analyzer and its uses.

Module 5: (10 hours)

Planar Transmission Lines: Planer transmission lines such as stripline, microstrip line, slotline and coplanar waveguides. Characteristics of planar transmission lines. Losses in Microstrip Lines- Quality Factor Q of Microstrip Lines- Substrate materials.

Introduction to MIC’s:-Technology of hybrid MICs, monolithis MICs. Comparison of both MICs.

Reference Books:

1.	Liao S.Y.”Microwave devices and Circuits”, Prentice Hall Of India, New Delhi, 3rd Ed. 2006 
2.	Rizzi P.A,”Microwave Engineering,Passive Circuits” Prentice Hall of India 
3.	Pozar D.M .,” Microwave Engineering”, John Wiley 

4.	Annapurna Das and Sisir Das, “Microwave Engineering”, Tata-McGraw Hill , New Delhi, 2008. 

5.	R.E. Collin : Foundations for Microwave Engg- – IEEE Press Second Edition. 
