EE 010 704: Modern Control Theory

Teaching Schedule: 2hours Lecture and 1hour Tutorial	Credits -3

Objective: To provide sound knowledge of advanced control systems

Module 1 (9 Hrs)

Design of modern control systems- Concept of Controllability and Observability, Kalman’s and Gilbert’s tests for controllability and observability. Pole placement design using state variable feed back. Observers- design of full order observer.

Module 2. (9Hrs)

Non-linear systems – Characteristics – Phase plane analysis – linearization and stability of equilibrium points – Iscoline method – limit cycles of phase plane – stability of limit cycles.

Module 3.(9Hrs)

Describing function method– Harmonic linearization, describing function of nonlinear systems(On-Off, saturation and dead-zone only)-Analysis of nonlinear systems using describing function. Limit cycles’ amplitude and frequency – Stability of non-linear systems – Lyapunov’s method for non-linear system – Popov’s criterion.

Module 4. (9Hrs)

Discrete time systems – Sampling theorem – sample and hold circuits and data reconstruction – Z-transforms – inverse Z transforms – pulse transfer function – state variables – description of discrete time systems – time domain analysis – stability using Jury’s tests and Schurcohn method.

Module 5. (9Hrs)

Computer control of industrial processes(Basic Concepts only) – Control hierarchies for plant level automation – Microprocessor/microcontroller/DSP-based control.

Programmable logic controllers –Principle of operation- Architecture. Introduction to PLC programming –symbols used in ladder diagrams-AND,OR,NOR,XOR,Latch operations, Illustrative example of a motor control using PLC.

PC-based control – Direct Digital control (Basic concept only). Distributed Digital control (Basic Concept only) .



Text Books:

1.  K.P. Mohandas, Modern Control Engineering, Sanguine Technical Publishers.

2	S.Hassan Saeed, Automatic Control Systems. Katson Books 

3	M.N. Bandyopadhay, Control Engineering-Theory and Practice, PHI. 
 
Reference:

1  Alberto Isidori – Non-linear control systems

2.	S. Wiggins – Introduction to applied non-linear dynamical systems and chaos 
3.	Gene. F. Franklin and David Powel – Digital control of dynamic systems,Pearson. 

4.	Benjamin .C. Kuo – Digital control systems 

5.	Digital Control Engineering-Analysis and Design, M.Sami Sadali, Elsevier 

6.	M. Gopal – Digital control and state variable methods,TMH 

7.	Stefani,Shahian,Savant and Hostetter, Design of feedback Control Systems, Oxford University Press. 

8.	Krishna Kant , Computer Based Industrial Control ,PHI(Module 5) 

9.	S.K. Singh, Process Control, Concepts, Dynamics and Applications, PHI.(Module 5) 

10.	W.Bolton – Instrumentation and control systems, Elsevier(Module 5) 
