EE 010 604  Digital Signal Processing

Teaching scheme Credits: 4 3 hours lecture and 1 hour tutorial per week


Objectives


•	To provide knowledge of transforms for the analysis of discrete time systems. 

•	To impart knowledge in digital filter design techniques and associated problems. 

Module 1 (14hrs)

Discrete time signals and systems: Basic principles of signal processing-Building blocks of digital signal processing. Review of sampling process and sampling theorem. Standard signals-delta, step, ramp. Even and odd functions. Properties of systems-linearity, causality, time variance, convolution and stability –difference equations-frequency domain representation – Discrete – time Fourier transform and its properties- Z transform and inverse Z transform-solution of difference equations.

Module 2 (14hrs)

Discrete fourier transform-inverse discrete fourier transform-properties of DFT-linear and circular convolution-overlap and add method-overlap and save method-FFT - radix 2 DIT FFT-Radix2 DIF FFT

Module 3 (12hrs)

Digital filter design: Design of IIR filters from analog filters - analog butter worth functions for various filters - analog to digital transformation-backward difference and forward difference approximations- impulse invariant transformation – bilinear transformation-frequency warping and pre warping-design examples- frequency transformations. Structures for realizing digital IIR filters-Direct form 1-direct form II-parallel and cascade structure-lattice structure.

Module 4 (12hrs)

Design of FIR filters-Properties of FIR filters-Design of FIR filters using fourier series method - Design of FIR filters without using windows- Design of FIR filters using windows-Design using frequency sampling-Design using frequency sampling method-Design using Kaiser’s approach- realization of FIR filters .

Module 5 (8hrs)

Finite register length problems in digital filters-fixed point and floating point formats-errors due to quantization, truncation and round off. Introduction to DSP processors. Architecture of TMS 320C54 XX Digital Signal Processor. Principle of speech signal processing (Block Schematic only).

Text Books:

1.	John G. Proakis, Dimitris G. Manolakis, Digital Signal Processing ,PHI,New Delhi,1997V. 

2.	Mitra, Digital Signal Processing , 3e, Tata McGraw –Hill Education New Delhi,2007 

3.	P. Ramesh Babu- Digital Signal Processing-Scitech publication 
 


Reference Books:

1.	Alan V. Oppenheim, Ronald W. Schafer, Discrete time Signal Processing , PHI,New Delhi,1997. 

2.	Udayashankara , Real Time Digital Signal Processing, PHI, New Delhi, 2010. 

3.	Ganesh Rao, Digital Signal Processing, Sanguins 

4.	Haykin and Van Veen, Signals and Systems, John Wiley and sons Inc .,2010. 

5.	Li Tan, Digital Signal Processing-Architecture Implementation and Applications-Elsevier Publications 
 

