EE 010 805 G01: Soft Computing Techniques

(Global Elective)

Teaching scheme	Credits: 4

3 hours lecture and 1 hour tutorial per week

Objectives

•	To introduce the ideas of neural network, fuzzy logic,genetic algorithms and other random search procedures useful while seeking global optimum in self-learning situations. 
•	To introduce the techniques of soft computing systems which differ from conventional AI and computing in terms of its tolerance to imprecision and uncertainty. 

Module I (12 Hours)

Fundamentals of ANN – Biological prototype – Neural Network Concepts, Definitions - Activation. Functions – single layer and multilayer networks. Training ANNs – Supervised and unsupervised network.

Perceptrons – Exclusive OR problem – Linear seperability – perceptron learning - perceptron training algorithms.The back propagation Neural network – Architecture of the back propagation Network – Training algorithm –Network paralysis _ Local minima – temporal instability.

Module II (12 Hours)

Unsupervised learning-Competitive Network-Winner take all policy .Network initialization and weight adjustment.Geometric interpretation. Associative memory -ART NETWORKS – Bidirectional Associative memories- retreiving stored information.
Neuro Control System-Classical controls-neuro control –Basic identification scheme using nn-Forward modelling: Series -parallel identification.Non linear system identification-Direct inverse neuro control scheme with ANNI and ANNC.Adaptive neuro control.

Module III ( 12 Hours)

Introduction to classical sets - properties, Operations and relations; Fuzzy sets, Membership, Uncertainty, Operations, properties, fuzzy relations, cardinalities, membership functions. Fuzzification, Membership value assignment, development of rule base and decision making system, Defuzzification to crisp sets, Defuzzification methods.

Module IV (12 Hours)

Introduction to Genetic Algorithm. Simple Genetic Algorithm and its major operators: Reproduction, Crossover, Mutation etc. Mathematical Construction of Genetic Operators. Tunning of membership function using genetic algorithm.

Module V (12 Hours)

Application of neural network for load forcasting, image enhancement, signal processing, pattern recognition.
Fuzzy logic applications: Fuzzy logic control and Fuzzy classification.

Application of GA to neural network Tuning of controllers, Electric drives and Power System.

Introduction to MATLAB Neural network tool box, Fuzzy tool box and Genetic programming (Basic Treatment Only)
 
Internal Continuous Assessment (Maximum Marks-50)

60% -  Tests (minimum 2)

20% - Assignments (minimum 2) , One assignment must be based on MATLAB Programming for any application of neural network, Fuzzy and GA tool.(Only Basic Treatment expected)

20% -  Regularity in the class





Text Books

1 .  Philip D.Wasserman, Neural Computing(Theory and Practice )

2 .  J.Zuradha,Introduction to Artificial Neural System

3 .  S. Rajasekaran and G.A.V.Pai, Neural Networks, Fuzzy Logic and Genetic algorithms, PHI,

2003.

4 .  Kalyanmoyi Deb,Multi-Objective Optimization using Evolutionary Algorithms,Wiley,2001

Reference Books

1.	Timothy J. Ross, “ Fuzzy Logic With Engineering Applications”, McGraw-Hill Inc. 1997 

2.	Linus Fe, Neural Network in Computer Intelligence , McGrawHill 

3.	J.S.R.Jang, C.T.Sun and E.Mizutani, Neuro-Fuzzy and Soft Computing, PHI, 2007. 

4.	Simon Haykin, “Neural Networks- A comprehensive foundation”, Pearson Education, 2001. 

5.	T.Mitchel, Machine Learning,McGrawHill, 1997. 

6.	Reeves, Colin R., Rowe, Jonathan E.Genetic Algorithms - Principles and Perspectives,Springer,2002 
 
