EE 010 406: Computer Programming

Teaching scheme	Credits: 4

3 hours lecture and 1 hour tutorial per week

Objectives

•	To impart the concepts of structured programming. 

•	To develop programming skill in students 

Module 1 (10 hours)

Introduction to C: Steps in executing a C program – C Tokens- C character set – identifiers and keywords – data types – constants and variables – declarations – type casting - operators
– expressions – statements – special operators: comma and sizeof operators- library input-output functions.

Branching control statements: if, if-else, nested if-else, switch, goto statements – conditional operators.

Module 2 (14 hours)

Looping control statements : ‘while’, ‘do-while’, ‘for’ statements – nested loops, break and continue statements.
Arrays: single dimensional arrays –– declaring and initializing arrays- searching & sorting in arrays.
Strings: Declaration – initialization.
Multidimensional arrays -declaration – initialization - matrix operations – addition, transpose and multiplication.

Module 3 (13 hours)

Functions: Declaration, definition and access – passing arguments to a function – pass by value and pass by reference – recursion- - passing arrays to a function –– string handling functions – comparison, concatenation and sorting of strings.

Storage classes: automatic variables – external variables – register variables – scope and life time of variables.
Pointers: Concept of pointers– pointer declaration – operations on pointers-pointers as function arguments.

Module 4 (12 hours)

Structures and union: definition – declaration of structure variables- initialization – accessing structure members – array of structures – passing structure to a function – sorting of structures –– union.

Dynamic memory allocation – self referential structures – basic concepts of   linked lists.

Module 5 (11 hours)

Files: File pointers – data files: text mode & binary mode – file operations- opening and closing – reading and writing- file handling functions.
Command line arguments – macros – C pre processor


Text books:

1.	Balagurusamy, Programming in ANSI C , TMH 

2.	K.R. Venugopal and S.R. Prasad, Mastering C , TMH 

Reference Books

1.	Kernighannn & Ritchie, The C programming language, Pearson Education, Asia 

2.	Mullish & Cooper, The Spirit of C, An Introduction to modern programming,, Jaico Publishing Co. 
3.	Yashwant Kanetkar, Let us C, BPB publ. 
4.	Byron S. Gottfried, Programming with C, Schaum Outlines –,McGraw Hill. 
5.	Ashok Kamthane, Programming with ANSI & Turbo C-, Pearson Education Asia 
 



