EE 010 605 Microcontrollers and Embedded Systems

Teaching scheme Credits: 4 3 hours lecture and 1 hour tutorial per week


Objectives

•	To impart knowledge about 8051 microcontroller programming and interfacing. 

•	To introduce students to advanced PIC 16F877 microcontroller and embedded systems 

•	. 

Module 1(14hrs)
Introduction to Embedded Systems (block diagram description)- Microcontrollers and Microprocessors - Comparison.
Intel 8051: Architecture–Block diagram- Oscillator and Clock-Internal Registers-Program Counter-PSW-Register Banks-Input and Output ports-Internal and External memory, Counters and Timers, Serial data I/O- Interrupts - SFRs.

Module 2 (14hrs)

Programming of 8051: Instruction syntax-Types of instructions–Moving data-Arithmetic Instructions-Jump and Call Instructions-Logical Instructions-Single Bit Instructions. Arithmetic programs. Timing subroutines –Software time delay- Software polled timer-Addressing Modes – Application of Keil C in microcontroller programming.

Module 3 (10hrs)

I/O Programming: Timer/Counter Programming -Interrupts Programming- Timer and external Interrupts- Serial Communication- Different character transmission techniques using time delay, polling and interrupt driven-Receiving serial data – polling for received data, interrupt driven data reception-RS232 Serial Bus standard.

Module 4 (10hrs)

Microcontroller system design: External memory and Memory Address Decoding for EPROM and RAM. Interfacing keyboard. 7 segment display and LCD display. Interfacing of ADC (0808) and DAC (808) to 8051- frequency measurement – Interfacing of stepper motor.

Module 5 (12hrs)

Introduction to RISC Microcontrollers: Architecture of PIC 16F877 microcontroller- FSR
– different Reset conditions – various oscillator connections- Internal RC, External RC, Crystal Oscillator and external clock. PIC memory organization – Program (Code) memory and memory map, Data memory and Data EEPROM.

Instruction set – Different addressing modes. Timers - Interrupt structure in PIC 16F877 microcontroller. Simple assembly language programs - square wave generation - reading/writing with internal data EEPROM.

Text books:

1.	Muhammad Ali Mazidi and Janice Gillispie Mazidi, The 8051 Microcontroller and Embedded Systems, Pearson Education Asia. 

2.	Ajay V Deshmukh , Microcontrollers- Theory and Applications , Tata McGraw – Hill Education, New Delhi 
 

Reference books

1.	Kenneth J. Ayala, The 8051 Microcontroller – Architecture, Programming and Applications, Penram International Publishing (India), Second Ed. 

2.	K.V.Shibu, Introduction to Embedded Systems, 1e, Tata McGraw –Hill Education, New Delhi 2009 

3.	Dreamtech Software Team, Programming of Embedded Systems , Wiley Dreamtech 

4.	John B. Peatman,  Design with PIC Microcontrollers , Pearson Education 

5.	Myke Predko, Programming and Customizing the 8051 Microcontroller, Tata McGraw Hill Education, New Delhi, 2009 

6.	Intel Data Book on MCS 51 family 
 

