EE 010 708:  Control And Simulation Laboratory





Teaching Scheme	Credits: 2

3 hours lab per week

Objectives

1.	To impart knowledge in various aspects of control systems through experiments 

2.	To impart knowledge in the simulation of different systems 

PART A


1.	Transfer function of armature controlled D.C. motor b) Field controlled D.C. motor. 
2.	Transfer function and characteristics of amplidyne. 

3.	Load characteristics of amplidyne under different levels of compensation. 

4.	Closed loop voltage regulation of separately excited D.C generator using amplidyne. 

5.	Characteristics of synchro pair and its transfer function 

6.	Closed loop feedback control system for D.C. servo motor with velocity feedback. 

7.	Level process control/ Temperature process control using PI, PD and PID control. 

8.	Transfer function and characteristics of A.C. servomotor. 

9.	Closed loop performance of inverted pendulum. 

10.	Open loop control of stepper motor using microprocessor. 

PART B

1.	Step response and computation of time-domain specifications of typical second order systems using MATLAB. 
2.	Frequency response and computation of frequency -domain specifications of typical second order systems using MATLAB. 
3.	Design of lag compensator using MATLAB. Verification of the frequency response characteristics of the designed compensator using passive elements. 

4.	Design of lead compensator using MATLAB. Verification of the   frequency 

response characteristics of the designed compensator using passive elements.

5.	Design of PD,PI and PID controllers for conceptual systems using MATLAB/LabView.
6.	State variable analysis of inverted pendulum using MATLAB. 

7.	Simulation of models(Transfer function and state –space) of conceptual systems using SIMULINK/Lab View. 
8.	Simulation and analysis of non-linear and discrete time systems using SIMULINK. 
 
9.	Analysis of D.C and A.C circuits using PSpice(for independent sources and dependent sources). 
10.	Analysis BJT/MOSFET circuits using PSice. 

References:

1.	Richard C. Dorf and Robert H. Bishop, Modern Control Systems,Eleventh Edition, Pearson Educatio,n2009. 
2.	Katsuhiko Ogatta, Modern Contro Engineering,Fourth Edition, Pearson Education,2002. 
3.	Muhammad H. Rashid, Introduction to PSpice Using Orcad for Circuits and Electronics, Third Edition,PHI2009. 

4.	R.K. Bansal,A.K. Goel,M.K Sharma,MATLAB and Its Application in Engimneering, Second edition, Pearson,2010. 
 
