EE 010 606 L01  High Voltage Engineering

Teaching scheme Credits: 4 2 hours lecture and 2 hours tutorial per week


Objectives

•	To impart the basic techniques of high voltage AC, DC and Impulse generation and measurement. 

•	To develop understanding about different high voltage testing techniques performed on electrical equipment. 


Module I (14 hours)

Fundamentals of electric breakdown in gases
Gas as insulating medium - Types of ionization by collision - types of collision. Condition for ionization by electron/ion collision - Collision cross section - Electric fields of low E/P (electric field/pressure in a gas medium).

Ionization process in gaseous media - Townsend mechanism and criterion of breakdown in gases - Paschen’s law and its application- Streamer theory of breakdown- Corona discharges-Different theories of breakdown in solid dielectrics- pure and commercial liquids.

Module II (12 hours)

Generation of High DC, AC and Impulse voltages

HVDC : Cockcroft Walton double circuits – Multipliers- Vande Graaff generator
HVAC : Generation of High AC voltages- Cascade connection of transformers – resonant transformers - Tesla coil.
Impulse generation: Definition of impulse wave – B.I.S specification – single stage and multi stage impulse generator circuits. Tripping methods of impulse generator circuits - Impulse current generator.

Module III (12 hours) Measurement of High DC and AC

Peak voltage- Sphere gap for measurement of DC,AC and impulse voltages. Measurement of HVDC by generating voltmeter – Potential dividers. Measurement of HVAC - Series impedance and Capacitor meters – Capacitance Potential Dividers – CVT

Module IV (10 hours)

Measurement of Impulse voltage and current

Measurement of impulse voltages and currents- Potential dividers - Measurement of impulse current- Hall generators - Magnetic potentio devices – Low current resistive shunts (Peak)

Module V (12 hours)

High voltage testing techniques

Measurement of dielectric constant and loss angle – High voltage Schering Bridge – Partial discharge measurements in high voltage equipment. Power frequency and impulse testing of high voltage apparatus – B.I.S specification – HV testing of insulators, bushing, cables and transformers.
 

Text Books

1.	Naidu & Kamaraju ,High voltage Engineering ,Tata Mc Graw Hill Publications. 

2.	E. Kuffel & W.S Zaengel ,High Voltage Engineering Fundamentals, Oxford Pergamon Press 

Reference Books

1.	L.Lalston , High voltage Technology , Oxford university press. 

2.	Ravindra Arora ,High voltage insulation engineering , New Age International (P) Ltd. 

3.	High voltage experimental Techniques, Dieter Kind, Vieweg &Sohn Verlagsgesellschaft mbH, Braunschweig/ Wiesbaden, 1978 
 
