IT010 403: Computer Organisation and Architecture

Teaching scheme	Credits: 4

2 hours lecture and 2 hours tutorial per week

Objectives

•	To give an insight into the organisation of  functional units of a computer system

•	Also to give a fair idea of the architecture of a computer system

.


Module I (9 hours)

Introduction- Function and structure of a computer, Functional components of a computer, Interconnection of components Performance of a computer Representation of Instructions-Machine instructions, Operands, Addressing modes, Instruction formats, Instruction sets, Instruction set architectures – CISC and RISC architectures Programming- Concepts of machine level programming, assembly level programming and high level programming.

Module II (12 hours)

Processing Unit- Organisation of a processor- Registers, ALU and Control unit, Data path in a CPU, Instruction cycle Arithmetic and Logic Unit- Arithmetic algorithms, Design of arithmetic unit, logic unit, status register, and accumulator Control Unit- Operations of a control unit, Design of Hardwired control unit and Microprogrammed control unit

Module III (12 hours)

Memory Subsystem- Semiconductor memories, Memory cells – SRAM and DRAM cells, Internal Organization of a memory chip, Organization of a memory unit, Error correction memories, Interleaved memories, Cache memory unit – Concept of cache memory, Mapping methods, Organization of a cache memory unit, Fetch and write mechanisms, Memory management unit – Concept of virtual memory, Address translation, Hardware support for memory management.

Module IV (12 hours)

Input/Output Subsystem- Access of I/O devices, I/O ports, I/O control mechanisms – Program controlled I/O, Interrupt controlled I/O and DMA controlled I/O, I/O interfaces – Serial port, Parallel port, PCI bus, SCSI bus, USB bus, Firewall and Infiniband, I/O peripherals – Input devices, Output devices, Secondary storage devices.

Module V ( 15 hours)

Parallel Organisations- Introduction to pipelining and pipeline hazards, Design issues of pipeline architecture , Instruction level parallelism, Introduction to Interconnection Network-Practical issues, Examples Multiprocessors- Characteristics, Memory organisation, Synchronization, Models of memory consistency, Issues of deadlock and scheduling, Cache and related problems, Parallel Processing Concepts.



Text Books

1.	Hamacher, Vranesic & Zaky -Computer Organization, , McGraw Hill 
2.	M. Morris Mano -Digital Logic and Computer Design PHI Edition 
3.	William Stallings -Computer Organization and Architecture, Prentice Hall. 

Reference Books

1.	John P. Hayes, “Computer Architecture and Organization”, Third Edition, Tata McGraw Hill, 1998. 
2.	V.P. Heuring, H.F. Jordan, “Computer Systems Design and Architecture”, Second Edition, Pearson Education, 2004 

3.	P. Pal Chaudhuri, “Computer Organisation and Design”, Third Edition, PHI,India, 2009 
4.	Linda Null and Julia Labour, ”Computer Organisation and Architecture”, 2nd edition, Jones and Bartlett Publishers,LLC, USA 
