
EN010 402(ME): Principles of Management

(Common with EN010 502(ME))

Teaching scheme Credits: 4 3 hours lecture and 1 hour tutorial per week


Objectives

•	To develop an understanding of different functional areas of management. 

•	To understand the functions and duties an individual should perform in an organisation. 

Module I (12 hours)

Management Concepts: Vision, Mission, Goals and Objectives of management-MBO-Scientific management- Functions of management- Planning- Organizing- Staffing-Directing- Motivating- Communicating- Coordinating- Controlling- Authority and Responsibility- Delegation- Span of control- Organizational structure- Line, Line and staff and Functional relationship.

Module II (12 hours)

Personnel Management: Definition and concept- Objectives of personnel management-Manpower planning- Recruitment and Selection of manpower- Training and development of manpower- Labour welfare- Labour turnover- Quality circle- Industrial fatigue- Industrial disputes-Method of settling disputes- Trade unions.

Module III (12 hours)

Production management: Objectives and scope of production management- Functions of production department- production management frame work- product life cycle-Types of production- Production procedure- Project planning with CPM and PERT- Basic concepts in network.

Module IV (12 hours)

Financial Management: Objectives and Functions of Financial Management- Types of Capital- Factors affecting working capital- Methods of financing.

Cost Management: Elements of cost- Components of cost- Selling Price of a product.

Module V (12 hours)

Sales and Marketing Management: Sales management- Concept- Functions of sales department- Duties of sales engineer- Selling concept and Marketing concept- Marketing-Definition and principles of marketing- Marketing management and its functions- Sales forecasting- Pricing- Advertising- Sales promotion- Channels of distribution- Market research.

Text Books

1.	Koontz and Weihrich, Essentials of Management, Tata McGraw Hill. 
2.	Mahajan M., Industrial Engineering and Production Management, Dhanpat Rai and Co. 
3.	Kemthose and Deepak, Industrial Engineering an Management, Prentice Hall of India. 

Reference Books

1.	Martand Telsang, Industrial Engineering and Production Management. 
2.	Khanna O.P., Industrial Engineering and Management, Dhanpat Rai and Co. 
3.	Philip Kotler, Marketing Management, Prentice Hall of India. 
4.	Sharma S. C. & Banga T. R., Industrial Organisation and Engineering Economics, 

Khanna Publishers. 

5.	Prasanna Chandra, Financial Management, Tata McGraw Hill. 
