IT010 605: DESIGN AND ANALYSIS OF ALGORITHMS (Common with CS010 601)

Teaching scheme Credits: 4 3 hours lecture and 1 hour tutorial per week


Objectives

•	To develop an understanding about basic algorithms and different problem solving strategies. 

•	To improve creativeness and the confidence to solve non-conventional problems and expertise for analysing existing solutions. 


Module I (13 hours) Introduction and Complexity

What is an algorithm – Properties of an Algorithm, Development of an algorithm, Pseudo-code Conventions, Recursive Algorithms – Performance Analysis - Space and Time Complexity –Asymptotic Notations – ‘Oh’, ‘Omega’, ‘Theta’, Worst, Best and Average Case Complexity, Running Time Comparison, Common Complexity Functions -Recurrence Relations – Solving Recurrences using Iteration and Recurrence Trees – Example Problems – Profiling - Amortized Complexity.

Module II	(11 hours)

Divide and Conquer - Control Abstraction, Finding Maximum and Minimum, Costs associated element comparisons and index comparisons, Binary Search, Divide and Conquer Matrix Multiplication, Stressen’s Matrix Multiplication, Quick Sort, Merge Sort. – Refinements.

Module III    (14 hours)

Greedy Strategy - Control Abstraction, General Knapsack Problem, Minimum Cost Spanning Trees – PRIM’s Algorithm, Kruskal’s Algorithm, Job sequencing with deadlines. Dynamic Programming - Principle of Optimality, Multistage Graph Problem, Forward Approach, Backward Approach, All-Pairs Shortest Paths, Traveling Salesman Problem.

Module IV    (11 hours)

Backtracking – State Space Tree - Fixed Tuple and Variable Tuple Formulation - Control Abstraction – Generating Function and Bounding Function - Efficiency of the method - Monte Carlo Method – N-Queens Problem, Sum of Subsets.

Branch and Bound Techniques – FIFO, LIFO, and LC Control Abstractions, 15-puzzle.

Module V	(11 hours)

Sophisticated Algorithms - Approximation Algorithms – Planar Graph Coloring, Vertex cover - String Matching Algorithms – Rabin Karp algorithm - Topological Sort - Deterministic and Non-Deterministic Algorithms.

Lower Bound Theory - Comparison Trees for Searching and Sorting, lower bound on comparison based algorithms, Sorting, Selection & Merging; Oracles and Adversary Arguments –Merging,Basic concepts of randomized algorithm-Las Vagas algorithm for search.

Reference Books

1.	Horowitz, Ellis, Sahni, Sartaj & Rajasekaran, Sanguthevar, Fundamentals of Computer Algorithms, , 2nd Edition, Universities Press, Hyderabad . 

2.	Thomas Coremen, Charles, Ronald Rives, Introduction to algorithm, PHI Learning 

3.	Sara Baase & Allen Van Gelder , Computer Algorithms – Introduction to Design and Analysis, Pearson Education.. 

4.	Anany Levitin, Introduction to The Design & Analysis of Algorithms, Pearson Education, 2nd Edition, New Delhi, 2008. 

5.	Berman and Paul, Algorithms, Cenage Learning India Edition, New Delhi, 2008. 

6.	S.K.Basu , Design Methods And Analysis Of Algorithms ,PHI Learning Private Limited, New Delhi,2008. 

7.	Jon Kleinberg and Eva Tardos, Algorithm Design, Pearson Education, New Delhi, 2006. 

8.	Hari Mohan Pandey, Design Analysis And Algorithms, University Science Press, 2008. 

9.	R. Panneerselvam, Design and Analysis of Algorithms, PHI Learning Private Limited, New Delhi, 2009. 

10.	Udit Agarwal, Algorithms Design And Analysis, Dhanapat Rai & Co, New Delhi, 2009. 

11.	Aho, Hopcroft and ullman, The Design And Analysis of Computer Algorithms, Pearson Education, New Delhi, 2007. 

12.	S.E.Goodman and S. T. Hedetmiemi, Introduction To The Design And Analysis Of Algorithms, McGraw-Hill International Editions, Singapore 2000. 

13.	Richard Neapolitan, Kumarss N, Foundations of Algorithms, DC Hearth &company. 

14.	Sanjay Dasgupta, Christos Papadimitriou, Umesh Vazirani, Algorithms, Tata McGraw-Hill Edition. 
