ME 010 406(EE) Electrical Technology

(Common with PE010 406 (EE) and AU010 406 (EE))

Teaching scheme	Credits: 4

3 hours lecture and 1 hour tutorial per week

Objectives

Understanding the basic working principles of DC machines Ac machines and its drives

Module I (8 hours)

D.C. Generator - O.C.C. – Condition for self excitation – field critical resistance – critical speed - Load characteristics of generators- Losses- power flow diagram- efficiency- condition for maximum efficiency- Application.

Module II (16 hours)

D.C. Motors: Back emf – speed and torque equation- starting and speed control – testing of D.C. Motors – brake test – Swinburn’s test- Performance characteristics of Shunt, Series and Compound motors. - Applications

Transformer – Emf equation: No load current – equivalent circuit – regulation - efficiency. Determination of regulation and efficiency from O.C. and S.C. tests – cooling of transformer. Basic principle of 3 phase transformer - Applications

Module III (13 hours)

Alternators - Construction details: Type – emf equation (winding factor need not be derived)
– synchronous impedance – regulation by emf and mmf method. Synchronous Motors: Principle of operation – method of starting.

Three phase induction motor: Production of rotating magnetic field - equivalent circuit – torque equation – torque slip characteristics – no load and blocked rotor tests – starting and speed control – Application

Single Phase motor: Different types - Application.

Module IV (13 hours)

Industrial drives – electric drives – advantages – individual drive and group drive – factors affecting choice of motor – mechanical characteristics of a.C. and D.C. motors – motors for particular application like textile mill, steel mill, paper mill, mine, hoists, crane etc. – size and rating of motor . Electric traction – Different systems of traction – comparison – track electrification – different systems – traction motor characteristics – electric braking – plugging – Dynamic and regenerative braking.

Module V (10 hours)

Power semiconductor devices: power diodes – SCR’s - principle of operation of SCR’s – two transistor analogy of SCR – characteristics – SCR rating (basic principle only). High frequency heating – induction and dielectric heating – resistance heating resistance welding-block schematic of resistance welding scheme.
 
Text Books

1.	Dr. P S Bimbra, Electrical Machinery, Khanna Publishers 
2.	J B Gupta, Electrical Machines , S K Kataria and Sons 

3.	Dr. P S Bimbra, Power Electronics, Khanna Publishers 

Reference Books

1.	Alexander Langsdorf A S: Theory of AC Machinery, Mc-Graw Hill 
2.	Say M G: Performance and design of AC Machines, ELBS 
3.	Electrical machines, Drives and Power Systems: Thoedore Wildi, Pearson Ed. 
4.	P.C. Sen, Thyristor DC Drives, Wiley-Interscience Publication 1984 
5.	Joseph Vithayathil, Power Electronics-Principles and applications, TMH, 2010 
6.	B. K. Bose, Modern Power Electronics and A.C. Drives, PHI, 2002. 
7.	G.K. Dubey, Fundamentals of Electrical Drives, Narosa Publishing House, New Delhi,2005 
 
