ME010 405: Machine Drawing

(Common with PE010 405 and AU010 405)
Teaching scheme	Credits:4
3 hours practical and 1 hour theory per week

Objectives :

•	To impart the fundamental concepts of machine drawing. 

•	To develop primary knowledge of working drawings. 

•	To produce orthographic drawing of different machine parts. 

•	To develop skill to produce assembly drawings. 

•	To develop skill to produce detailed drawingsof machines parts from assembly drawing. 

Module-1(15hrs) 
Conversion of pictorial views into orthographic views-dimensioning techniques-preparation of drawing- - Limits and tolerances of machine parts - Hole system and shaft system of tolerances - Designation of fundamental deviation - Types of fits and their selection - Indication of dimensional tolerances and fits on simple machine parts - Geometrical tolerances – Recommended symbols - Indication of geometrical tolerances on simple machine parts - Surface roughness – Indication of surface finish on drawings - Preparation of shop floor drawings of simple machine parts. 
Types of screw threads-different forms-conventional representation-sketching  orthographic  views  of 
hexagonal	bolts	and  nuts -dimensional	drawing-square headed  bolts  and nuts –sketching	of  different
types	of	lock nuts  and locking  devices-  foundation bolts.	
Forms	of	rivet	heads – riveted joints-lap	and butt joints with single and multiple riveting in	chain and

zig – zag arrangements –dimensional drawing. Sketching of conventional representation of welded joint.

Module-2 (20 hrs)

Fully dimensioned and sectional drawing of the following Joints-knuckle joint-jib and cotter

shaft couplings-types of keys- protected types of flanged couplings-bushed pin type flexible coupling-Oldham’s coupling
Pipe joints-spigot and socket joint-flanged joint-

Shaft bearings and support-Plummer block  IC engine parts-piston-connecting rod

Module-3(25hrs)

Assembly and working drawings of the followingValves

-stop valve-spring loaded safety valve –dead weight safety valve-feed check valve-feed check valve Machine elements-screw jack –lathe tool post-spindle-tailstock

Note:

•	Drawing practical classes have to be conducted by using any standard CAD software and using drawing instruments in alternate weeks (3Hours) preferably for each half of the student. 

Semester End examination (3Hours) shall be conducted by using drawing instruments only 

•	All drawing exercises mentioned above are for class work. Additional exercises wherever necessary may be given as homework 
•	

References:

1.	N.D.Bhatt and Panchal, Machine Drawing, Charator Publishing House 

2.	P I.Varghese, Machine Drawing, VIP Publishers, Thrissur 

3.	Ajeet Singh, Machine Drawing, Tata McGraw Hill Education Private Ltd 

4.	P.S.Gill , Machine Drawing, S.K.Kataria &Sons 
 

University examination pattern

Question I: One questions of 10 marks from module-1
Question II: One questions of 30 marks out of 2 questions from module-2. Question III:One question of 60 marks from module-3
.
 
