ME 010 702: Dynamics of Machines

Teaching scheme	Credits: 4

2 hours lecture and 2 hour tutorial per week

Objectives

•	To understand the basic principles involved in the balancing of rotating and reciprocating masses 
•	To understand the basic concepts of vibration of single degree of freedom systems 
•	To understand the methods of analysis of two degree and multi degree of freedom systems. 
•	To understand the concepts in transient and non linear vibration 

•	To understand the methods of noise control 

Module I (14 hours)

Balancing: - Balancing of rotating masses, static balancing and dynamic balancing, Balancing of several masses rotates in same plane, balancing of several masses rotating in several planes, Balancing machines.

Balancing of reciprocating masses: - The effect of inertia force of the reciprocating mass on the engine. Partial primary balance. Balancing of multi cylinder inline engines, v-engines, Radial engines, Direct and Reverse cranks

Module II (16 hours)

Vibrations: - Definitions, simple harmonic motion. Single degree freedom systems: - Undamped free vibrations: - Equations of motion Natural frequency, Energy method, Equilibrium methods, Rayleigh’s methods, Equivalent stiffness of spring combinations. Damped free vibrations: - Viscous damping, Free vibrations with viscous damping, Over damped system, Critically damped system, Under-damped system, Logarithmic decrement, viscous dampers, Energy dissipated by damping,
Forced Vibrations: - Forced harmonic excitation, Base Excitation, Vibration isolation and Transmissibility. Vibration measuring instruments.

Module III (14 hours)

Two degree freedom systems: - Principal modes of vibration, Rectilinear and angular modes, systems with damping, vibration absorbers, Centrifugal pendulum damper, Dry friction damper, untuned viscous damper.
Multi-degree of freedom system: - Free vibrations, equations of motion, Influence
Coefficients method, lumped mass systems, distributed mass systems (basics only), Stodola method, Dunkerly’s method.
Torsional Vibrations: - Torsionally equivalent shaft, torsional vibration of two rotor, three-rotor, and geared systems
 
Mahatma Gandhi University, Kottayam


Module IV (14 hours)

Critical speeds of shafts: - Critical speed of a light shaft is having a single disc without damping.
Transient vibration: - Laplace transformation, response to an impulsive input, response to a step input, phase plane method, shock spectrum.
Non -linear vibrations: - Phase plane, undamped free vibration with non-linear spring forces, hard spring, soft spring, Forced vibration with nonlinear forces, Duffings equation, self excited vibrations - problems.

Module V (12 hours)

Acoustics: - Sound propagation, decibels, acceptance noise levels, Air columns, acoustical measurements, Doppler Effect, microphones and loud Speakers. Recording and reproduction of sound, Fourier’s theorem and musical scale, Acoustic impedence filters.
Environmental noise control: Industrial noise control strategies Noise ratings, human ear. human tolerance levels, equivalent sound level and loudness contours - Noise control through barriers and enclosures and absorbent linings - problems.

References

1. Theory of Machines - Thomas Bevan
2.	Theory of Machines - P.L. Ballaney 
3.	Mechanical Vibrations, V edition - G.K. Groover 
4.	Theory of Vibrations with applications, III Edn - W.T. Thomson 
5.	Mechanical Vibrations - S. Graham Kelly, Schaum’s outlines 
6.	Fundamentals of Vibrations - Leonard Meirovitch, Mac Graw Hill 
7.	A text book of sound - L.P. Sharma & H.C. Saxena 
8.	Engineering Noise Control - D.A. Bies & C.H. Hausen. 

9.	Noise & Vibration Control - Leo N. Beraneck 
