ME010 704: Refrigeration and Air Conditioning

(Common with AU010 704)


Teaching scheme	Credits: 3

2 hours lecture and 1 hour tutorial per week


Objectives

•	To impart the basic concepts of Refrigeration and Air Conditioning 

•	To develop a sound physical understanding of the subject so that the learner will demonstrate the ability to design a refrigeration or air-conditioning equipment that meets the required specifications 
Module 1 (8 hours)

Principles of refrigeration: Thermodynamics of refrigeration – Carnot, reversed carrot cycle, heat pump, and refrigerating machine- coefficient of performance -unit of refrigeration-refrigeration methods - conventional refrigeration systems. Air refrigeration system -Bell Coleman cycle -C.O.P –capacity, work and refrigerant flow requirements in Bell Coleman cycle.

Module 2 (10 hours)

Vapor compression system: simple cycle -comparison with Carnot cycle, theoretical and actual cycles- COP- effect of operating parameters on COP- wet, dry and superheated compression- sub cooling - actual cycle representation on TS and PH diagrams- simple problems. Advanced vapor compression systems – multistage vapor compression systems- flash chamber- multiple compression and evaporation systems- cascading -simple problems.

Module 3 (10 hours)

Vapor absorption systems: simple cycles-actual cycle- ammonia water and lithium bromide water systems – COP -Electrolux system. Refrigerant and their properties: Nomenclature-suitability of refrigerants for various applications -unconventional refrigeration methods- vortex tube, steam jet, magnetic (Cryogenics) refrigeration and thermoelectric refrigeration- applied refrigeration: house hold refrigerator –unit air conditioners and water coolers- ice plant -cold storage

Module 4 (7 hours)

Refrigeration system components (Theory Only): water and air cooled condensers- evaporative condensers- expansion devises -capillary tube -constant pressure expansion valve- thermostatic expansion valve- float valve and solenoid valve. Evaporators: natural convection coils -flooded evaporators -direct expansion coils. Reciprocating compressors: single stage and multistage compressors- work done -optimum pressure ratio -effect of intercooling- volumetric efficiency -
 
Mahatma Gandhi University, Kottayam


effect of clearance- isothermal and adiabatic efficiency. Rotodynamic compresors: Screw and vane type compressors- principle of operation- hermetic, semi hermetic and open type refrigeration compressors.

Module 5 (10 hours)

Principles of air conditioning: Psychrometry and psychrometric chart - human comfort- effective temperature- comfort chart. Applied psychrometry: sensible heat factor- psychometric process – problems. Winter air conditioning- heating load calculations- humidifiers and humidistat. Summer air conditioning- cooling load calculations- year round air conditioning -unitary and central systems -principles of air distribution -design of air duct systems.

Text Books

1.	Stoecker W.F. and Jones J.W, Refrigeration and Air-Conditioning, McGraw- Hill 

2.	Jordan and Prister, Refrigeration and Air-Conditioning, Prentice Hall of India. 

Reference Books

1.	Dossat., Principles of Refrigeration, John Wiley and Sons 
2.	Robert H. Enerick, Basic Refrigeration and Air-Conditioning, Prentice Hall. 

3.	Arora C.P., Refrigeration and Air-Conditioning, Tata McGraw- Hill 
