ME 010 707 Mechanical Measurements Laboratory

Teaching scheme	Credits: 2

3 hours practical per week

Objectives

•	To provide an exposure to the fundamentals of metrology 

•	To understand the need of precision measurement and measuring instruments 

1.	Study and use of laser interferometer for calibration of linear measurements. 

2.	Study of slip gauges – wringing – surface roughness - standards. 

3.	Study of surface plates, straight edges, angle plate, V-block etc and applications. 

4.	Measurement of out of roundness using roundness measuring instrument, V block and dial indicator etc. - reasons for out of roundness etc. 

5.	Measurements of straightness using sprit level and auto collimator. 

6.	Measurement of thread parameters using three wire method. 

7.	Measurement of tool angles of single point tool using tool maker’s microscope. 

8.	Measurement of gear parameters using profile projector. 

9.	Evaluation of straightness error using autocollimator, sprit level, straight edge etc. 

10.	Calibration and determination of uncertainties of the following; 

a.	Strain gauge load cells 

b.	Bourdon tube pressure gauge 

c.	LVDT 

d.	Thermocouples 

e.	Tachometers and stroboscopes, etc. 

11.	Study and measurement of surface roughness using surface roughness instrument. 

12.	Study and measurements with coordinate measuring machines. 

13.	Experiments on limits and fits. 

14.	Study and use of ultrasonic flaw detector. 

15.	Study of different types of dial indicators - stands and holders for dial gauges. 

16.	Study and use of different types of comparators. 

17.	Exercises on measurement system analysis 

18.	Study and making measurements with precision vernier calipers, dial calipers, spline micrometer, point micrometer, wire groove micrometer, depth micrometer, V- anvil micrometers, depth gear tooth micrometer, thread micrometer, disc micrometer, thread pitch gauge, vernier height gauge, slip gauges, optical flat, three pin micrometer, 
 pyrometer, RTD, bore dial gauge, depth gauge, pitch gauge, thickness gauge, radius gauge, hole test, bench center etc.

19.	Angular measurements using bevel protractor, sine bar, clinometers etc. 

20.	Measurement of vibration. 

21.	Analysis of automobile exhaust gas and flue gas. 

22.	Study and determination of area using planimeter. 

23.	Polishing, etching and determination of grain size and microstructure studies using optical microscope. 

TEXT BOOKS:

1.	Sharp K.W.B., Practical Engineering Metrology, Sir Isaac Pitman and sons Ltd, London, 1958. 

2.	Shotbolt C.R. and Gayler J.F.W, Metrology for Engineers, 5th edition, ELBS, London. 

REFERENCE BOOKS:

1.	Figliola, Richard S, and Beasley, Donald E, “Theory and Design for Mechanical Measurements”, Third edition, John Wiley and Sons Inc. 

2.	Collett, C.V. and Hope, A.D, “Engineering Measurements”, Second edition, ELBS/Longman. 
3.	Tarasevigh Y. and Yavosih E., Fits, Tolerances and Engineering Measurements, Foreign language publishing house, Moscow. 
