ME010 608 Machine Tool Laboratory

(Common with AU010 608)

Teaching scheme Credits: 2 3 hours practical per week


List of Experiments

1.	Study of precision tools used in machine tool laboratory: – Vernier caliper, micrometers, surface plates, surface gauges, gauge block, straight edges, dial gauge, plug and ring gauges, slip gauges, sine bar, care of tools and gauges. 
– 2 practices. 
2.	Study of lathe tools and accessories: - Selection of tool for different operations - tool materials: high carbon steel, HSS, cemented carbides, coated WC, indexable inserts, alumina, cBN, diamond etc. - tool nomenclature and attributes of each tool angles on cutting processes – effect of nose radius, side cutting edge angle, end cutting edge angle and feed on surface roughness – tool grinding and safe 
	working practices.	- 1 practice.
3.	Selection of speeds, feeds and depth of cut – selection of cutting fluids – different
	methods of holding work.	- 1 practice.
4.	Experiment on arc and gas welding: - butt welding and lap welding of M.S.
	sheets.	- 1 practice.
5.	(a) Measurement of cutting forces	in turning process using dynamometers.
	(b) Experiment on lathe:- Facing, plain turning, step turning and parting - groove
	cutting, knurling and chamfering - form turning and taper turning - eccentric
	turning.	
	(c) Measurement of flank wear in turning process using tool makers microscope.
		- 3 practices.
6.	Experiment on thread cutting: - single and multistart external and internal threads,
	square and V-threads.	- 1 practice.
7.	Disassembly and assembly of small assemblies such as tail stock, bench vice,
	screw jack etc.	- 1 practice.
8.	Experiment on drilling machine: - drilling, boring, reaming and counter sinking –
	taping – study of reamers and taping.	- 1 practice.
9.	Study and demonstration of N.C. machines:- CNC machines components - Point to point, straight cut and contouring positioning - incremental and absolute systems – open loop and closed loop systems – DDA integrator and interpolators - part programming fundamentals - manual programming – tape format – sequence number, preparatory functions, dimension words, speed word, feed world, tool world, miscellaneous functions – Computer aided part programming:- APT language structure: geometry commands, motion commands, postprocessor commands, compilation control commands – programming, simulation and demonstration exercises involving plane taper and form turning etc. 
-	3 practices. 
Besides to the skill development in performing the work, prepare the control charts and oral examination should also be carried out. Observation and record books are to be maintained.
 
The student’s assessment, continuous evaluation, awarding of sessional marks, record bonafides, oral examination etc and University examination shall be carried out by the faculty members (lecturer and above).

TEXT BOOKS:

1.  Acharkan. N., Machine Tool Design Vol. 1 to 4, MIR Publication.

REFERENCE BOOKS:

1.	Chapman, Workshop Technology, Vol II, ELBS. 

2.	HMT, Production Technology, Tata McGraw Hill. 
3.	Yoram Koren, Numerical Control of Machine Tools, McGraw-Hill. 
