ME010 801 Design of Transmission Elements

(Common with AU010 801)




Teaching scheme	Credits: 4

2 hours lecture, 2 hour tutorial and 1 hour drawing per week

Objectives

To provide basic design skill with regard to various transmission elements like clutches, brakes, bearings and gears.

Module I (20 Hrs)

Clutches - friction clutches- design considerations-multiple disc clutches-cone clutch- centrifugal clutch - Brakes- Block brake- band brake- band and block brake-internal expanding shoe brake.

Module II (17 Hrs)

Design of bearings - Types - Selection of a bearing type - bearing life - Rolling contact bearings - static and dynamic load capacity - axial and radial loads - selection of bearings - dynamic equivalent load - lubrication and lubricants - viscosity - Journal bearings - hydrodynamic theory - design considerations - heat balance - bearing characteristic number - hydrostatic bearings.

Module III (19 Hrs)

Gears- classification- Gear nomenclature - Tooth profiles - Materials of gears - design of spur, helical, bevel gears and worm & worm wheel - Law of gearing - virtual or formative number of teeth- gear tooth failures- Beam strength - Lewis equation- Buckingham’s equation for dynamic load- wear load-endurance strength of tooth- surface durability- heat dissipation - lubrication of gears - Merits and demerits of each type of gears.

Module IV (16 Hrs)

Design of Internal Combustion Engine parts- Piston, Cylinder, Connecting rod, Flywheel

Design recommendations for Forgings- castings and welded products- rolled sections- turned parts, screw machined products- Parts produced on milling machines. Design for manufacturing - preparation of working drawings - working drawings for manufacture of parts with complete specifications including manufacturing details.

Note: Any one of the following data book is permitted for reference in the final University examination:

1.	Machine Design Data hand book by K. Lingaiah, Suma Publishers, Bangalore/ Tata Mc Graw Hill
2.	PSG Design Data,  DPV Printers, Coimbatore.
 
Text Books

1.	C.S,Sarma, Kamlesh Purohit, Design of Machine Elements Prentice Hall of India Ltd NewDelhi 

2.	V.B.Bhandari, Design of Machine Elements McGraw Hill Book Company 
3.	M. F. Spotts, T. E. Shoup, Design of Machine Elements, Pearson Education. 

Reference Books

1.	J. E. Shigley, Mechanical Engineering Design, McGraw Hill Book Company. 
2.	Juvinall R.C & Marshek K.M., Fundamentals of Machine Component Design, John Wiley 

3.	Doughtie V.L., & Vallance A.V., Design of Machine Elements, McGraw Hill Book Company. 

4.	Siegel, Maleev & Hartman, Mechanical Design of Machines, International Book Company. 
 
