ME010 505 I. C. Engines & Combustion

(Common with AU010 505)

Teaching scheme	Credits: 4

3 hours lecture and 1 hour tutorial per week

Objectives

•	To impart the basic concepts of IC Engine and Combustion 



Module I (15 hours)

Working of two stroke and four stroke engines and valve timing diagrams of – Petrol and diesel engine. (Review only). Fuel air cycles. Ignition systems- Battery and magneto systems- ignition timing and spark advance. Fuels – Qualities, rating of fuels - Octane and Cetane numbers. Alternative fuels.

Types of engines - Wankel engine,- Stirling engine - Stratified charge engine - VCR engine - free piston engine.

Module II (15 hours)

Air fuel mixture requirements – Solex Carburettor. Stoichiometric and excess air calculations. Fuel injection systems in SI and CI engines - Fuel injection pumps.- nozzle- direct and indirect injections. MPFI systems and GDI engines. CRDI technology.

Lubrication systems- types – properties of lubricants. Flash point, fire point and viscosity index.

Module III (10 hours)

Thermodynamics of combustion. Combustion reaction of common fuels. Exhaust gas composition. Flue gas analysis. Air fuel ratio from exhaust gas composition. Variation of specific heats- heat losses- Dissociation.

Engine cooling systems- Air and liquid system- Super charging and turbo charging

Module IV (10 hours)

Combustion in SI engines- P-? diagram- Stages of combustions- Ignition lag. Flame propagation – Abnormal combustion – detonation effects. Combustion in CI engines, P-? diagram - Ignition delay, diesel knock- controlling methods.

Air motion- Squish, tumble, swirl motions. Different types combustion chamber for SI and CI engines.

Module V (10 hours)

Pollutants in SI and CI engines. NOx, CO, unburned hydrocarbons ,smoke and particulate. Measurement of exhaust emission. (HC, CO, NOx and smoke intensity ) Exhaust gas treatment.- Catalytic converter – Thermal reaction -Particulate trap.

Testing of IC engines - Indicated power – Brake Power - Volumetric efficiency - Heat balance test - Morse test.
 

Text Books

V Ganesan, Internal Combustion Engine Tata Mc Graw Hill Publishing Company Ltd. New Delhi 2006. -

Reference Books

John B Heywood, Internal Combustion Engine Fundamentals, Mc Graw Hill Publishing Company Sigapur,1998.
Obert E F,Internal Combustion Engine and air Pollution Mc Graw Hill book company New York.

Mathur and Sharma,A course in Internal Combustion Engine   - Dhanpat Rai Publications new

Delhi, 2004.

Sharma S.P, Fuels and Combustion, Tata Mc Graw Hill Publishing Company Ltd. New Delhi.1990.

Spalding D.B. Some Fundamentals of Combustion Better Worths Scientific Publications London, 1955.
