ME010 506 Thermodynamics

(Common with PE 010 506 and AU010 506)

Teaching scheme	Credits: 4

3 hours lecture and 1 hour tutorial per week

Objectives

•  To impart the basic concepts of Thermodynamics

Pre-requisites: Knowledge required to study this subject (especially any subject previously studied)

Module I (10 hours)

Fundamentals concepts – scope and limitations of thermodynamics. Thermodynamic systems
– different types of systems – macroscopic and microscopic analysis – continuum – Properties 
– state – processes. Thermodynamics equilibrium – Equation of state of an ideal gas – PVT system – Real gas relations – Compressibility factor – Law of corresponding states. 

Module II (15 hours) 
Laws of thermodynamics- Zeroth law of thermodynamics – Thermal equilibrium – Concept of temperature – Temperature scales – Thermometry – Perfect gas temperature scales. – Thermometry – Perfect gas temperature scales. Work and heat – First law of thermodynamics 

– Concept of energy _ First law for closed and open systems – Specific heats – internal energy and enthalpy – Steady flow energy equations _ Jule Thompson effect. 

Module III (15 hours) 
Second law of thermodynamics- Various statements and their equivalence_ Reversible process and reversible cycles- Carnot cycles- Corollaries of the second law – thermodynamics temperature scales – Clausis inequality- Concept of entropy – Calculation of change in entropy in various thermodynamic processes – Reversibility and irreversibility – Available and unavailable energy – Third law of thermodynamics. 

Module IV (10 hours) 
Thermodynamic relations – Combined first and second law equations – Hemholtz and gibbs functions – Maxwell relations- Equations for specific heats, internal energy, enthalpy and entropy – Clausius Clapeyron equations _ applications of thermo dynamic relations. 

Module V (10 hours) 
Properties of pure substances – PVT, PT and TS diagrams, Mollier diagrams- Mixture of gases and vapours- mixture of ideal gases – Dalton’s law – Gibbs law- Thermodynamic properties of mixtures 

Text Books

1  P K Nag, Engineering Thermodynamics, Tata Mc Graw Hill Publishing Company
Ltd. New Delhi 2008.
Reference Books

1.	J. F. Lee and FW Sears, Engineering Thermodynamics, Addison-Wesleg Publishing Company, London, 1962. 

2.	Spalding and Cole, Engineering Thermodynamics, The English Language Book Society and Edward Arnold Ltd.,1976. 
3.	M. A.chuthan, Engineering Thermodynamics,Prentice Hall of India Private Ltd, New Delhi 2002. 
4.	J.H Keenan,   Thermodynamics, John Wiley and Sons , New York, 1963. 
5.	Edward F Obert, Concept of Thermodynamics, McGraw Hill book company New York, 1988. 

6.	J.P. Holman, Thermodynamics, McGraw Hill book company New York, 1988. 

7.	Mark W. Zemansky, Heat and Thermodynamic, McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 2001. 

8	Roy T, Basic Engineering Thermodynamics, Tata Mc Graw Hill Publishing Company Ltd. New Delhi 1989. 
 
