ME 010 708 Advanced Machine Tools Laboratory

Teaching scheme	Credits: 2

3 hours practical per week

Objectives

•	To understand the different process parameters involved in shaping, slotting, milling, grinding machines. 

•	To analysis the causes for the variation on surface roughness obtainable in different machining process. 

PART – A

1. Experiment on shaping machine: - flat surfaces, dovetail cutting – grooving, keyway cutting etc. - 2 practices. 2. Experiment on slotting machine: - flat surfaces, dovetail cutting – grooving, keyway cutting etc. - making hexagonal hole using slotting machine. - 2 practices. 3. Study of milling machines – nomenclature of milling cutters – different types of milling cutters – attachments for milling: - vertical milling and universal milling attachment, high speed milling attachment, rack milling and slot attachments, parking bracket, rotary table, universal dividing head, vices, arbors, adaptors and collet chucks. - 1 practice.

4.	Experiment on milling machine: - 1 - plane milling, keyway cutting, cutting of splines. 
-	1 practice. 
5.	Experiment on milling machine: - 2 – cutting of spur, helical and bevel gears – study of different methods of indexing - multi slot cutting on milling machine by indexing. 
-	3 practices. 
6.	Study of surface grinding machine and demonstration of grinding of plane surface - study of cylindrical grinding machine and demonstration of plane cylindrical grinding – study and demonstration of planing machine – study and demonstration of broaching machine. 
-	2 practices. 
PART – B
Preparation of control charts - preparation of laboratory layout - facilities layout analysis– materials requirement planning – inventory analysis –preparation of process plan and cost estimation for the manufacture of various products – study of a jig and a fixture for drilling and milling operation - fabrication of simple bending dies – Preparation of process plans using CAPP software. - 3 practices.

Besides to the skill development in performing the work, oral examination should be conducted.

A detailed report on the work carried out on part – B is also to be prepared. Observation and record books are to be maintained for both part A and B.

The student’s assessment, continuous evaluation, awarding of sessional marks, record bonafides, oral examination etc and University examination shall be carried out by the faculty members (Assistant professor and above).

TEXT BOOKS:

1.  Acharkan. N., Machine Tool Design Vol. 1 to 4, MIR Publication.
 


REFERENCE BOOKS:

1.	Chapman, Workshop Technology, Vol II, ELBS. 
2.	HMT, Production Technology, Tata McGraw Hill. 
3.	Yoram Koren, Numerical Control of Machine Tools, McGraw-Hill. 
 
