ME010 503: Advanced Mechanics of Materials

(Common with PE010 503)

Teaching scheme	Credits: 4

2 hours lecture and 2 hour tutorial per week

Objectives

1.	To impart concepts of stress and strain analysis in a solid. 

2.	To study the methodologies in theory of elasticity at a basic level. 
3.	To acquaint with energy methods to solve structural problems. 

Module I (12 hours)

Basic equations of Elasticity, Stress at a point with respect to a plane - normal and tangential components of stress - stress tensor - Cauchy’s equations - stress transformation - principal stresses and planes - strain at a point - strain tensor - analogy between stress and strain tensors - constitutive equations - generalized Hooke’s law - relation among elastic constants – equations of equilibrium -strain-displacement relations –

Module II (12 hours)

Compatibility conditions - boundary conditions - Saint Venant’s principle for end effects –uniqueness condition. 2-D problems in elasticity. Plane stress and plane strain problems – Airy’s stress function – solutions by polynomial method – solutions for bending of a cantilever with an end load and bending of a beam under uniform load.

Module III (12 hours)

Equations in polar coordinates - Lame’s problem - stress concentration problem of a small hole in a large plate. Axisymmetric problems - thick cylinders - interference fit - rotating discs. Special problems in bending: Unsymmetrical bending - shear center - curved beams with circular and rectangular cross-section

Module IV (12 hours)

Energy methods in elasticity: Strain energy of deformation - special cases of a body subjected to concentrated loads, due to axial force, shear force, bending moment and torque – reciprocal relation -Maxwell reciprocal theorem - Castigliano’s first and second theorems - virtual work principle -minimum potential energy theorem - complementary energy

Module V (12 hours)

Torsion of non-circular bars: Saint Venant’s theory - Prandtle’s method - solutions for circular and elliptical cross-sections - membrane analogy - torsion of thin walled open and closed sections- shear flow

Text Books

1.	L. S. Sreenath, Advanced Mechanics of Solids, McGraw Hill 
2.	S. M. A. Kazimi, Solid Mechanics, McGraw Hill 

3.	S. P. Timoshenko, J. N. Goodier, Theory of elasticity, McGraw Hill 

Reference Books

1.	J. P. Den Hartog, Advance Strength of Materials, McGraw Hill 

2.	C. K. Wang, Applied Elasticity, McGraw Hill 
 
