ME010 504: Kinematics of Machinery

(Common with AU010 504)

Teaching scheme	Credits: 4

3 hours lecture and 1 hour tutorial per week

Objectives

1.	To understand the basic components and layout of linkages in the assembly of a system/machine. 
2.	To understand the principles involved in assembly the displacement, velocity and acceleration at any point in a link of a mechanism. 
3.	To understand the motion resulting from a specified set of linkages. 
4.	To understand and to design few linkage mechanisms and cam mechanisms for specified output motions. 
5.	To understand the basic concepts of toothed gearing and kinematics of gear trains. 

Module I (14hours)

Classification of mechanisms – Basic kinematic concepts and definitions – Degree of freedom, Mobility – Kutzbach criterion, Gruebler’s criterion – Grashof’s Law –Kinematic inversions of four-bar chain, slider crank chains and double slider crank chains – Limit positions –Mechanical advantage – Transmission Angle -Coupler curves – Description of some common Mechanisms – Quick return mechanisms, Straight line generators, Dwell Mechanisms, Ratchets and Escapements, Universal Joint, steering mechanisms

Module II (12hours)

Displacement, velocity and acceleration analysis of simple mechanisms – Graphical method – Velocity and acceleration polygons – Velocity analysis using instantaneous centers – Kennedy’s theorem, kinematic analysis by complex algebra methods – Vector approach – Computer applications in the kinematic analysis of simple mechanisms – Coincident points – Coriolis component of Acceleration.

Module III (10hours)

Kinematic synthesis ( Planar Mechanisms) - Tasks of kinematic synthesis – Type, Number and dimensional synthesis – Precision points - Graphical synthesis for four link mechanism Function generator – 2 position and 3 position synthesis – Overlay Method - Analytical synthesis techniques

Module IV (12 hours)

Cams and Followers: - types-follower motion-SHM-uniform velocity and acceleration-Cycloidal - displacement, velocity and acceleration curves-Cam profile-Reciprocating and oscillating followers-Tangent cams-Convex and concave cams with footed followers. Introduction to Polynomial cams.

Module V (12 hours)

Law of toothed gearing – Involutes and cycloidal tooth profiles –Spur Gear terminology and definitions –Gear tooth action – contact ratio – Interference and undercutting – Non-standard

gear teeth – Helical, Bevel, Worm, Rack and Pinion gears [Basics only] Gear trains – Speed ratio, train value – Parallel axis gear trains– Epicyclic Gear Trains – Differentials

Reference Books

1.	R L Norton, Kinematics and Dynamics of Machinery, 1st ed., Tata McGraw Hill Education Private Limited, Delhi, 2009 
2.	J. E. Shigley, J. J. Uicker, Theory of Machines and Mechanisms, McGraw Hill 

3	S .S Rattan Theory of Machines, 3rd ed., Tata McGraw Hill Education Private Limited, Delhi, 2009 

4	A. Ghosh, A. K. Malik, Theory of Mechanisms and Machines, Affiliated East West Press 
5	A. G. Erdman, G. N. Sandor, Mechanism Design: Analysis and synthesis Vol I & II, Prentice Hall of India 
