ME010 805G01 Industrial Safety

Teaching scheme	Credits: 4
2 hours lecture and 2 hours tutorial per week

Objectives

•	To develop an understanding of the principles of safety,terminolgies in accident prevention and its theories.. 
•	To understand the theory and practice of occupational health,ergonomics and hygiene,principle of fire engineering and fire fighting. 

Module-I (12 Hours)

Development of safety movement: - Need for safety-safety and productivity-planning for safety-planning procedure-safety policy-formulation of safety policy-safety budget-role and qualification of safety professional-safety committees-need, types and functions of committees-safety organizations.

Module II (12 Hours)

Accident prevention: - Basic philosophy of accident prevention-nature and causes of accidents-accident proneness-cost of accidents-accident prevention methods-Domino theory-safety education and training-training methods-motivation and communicating safety-personal protective equipments.

Module III (12 Hours)

Safety management techniques: - Safety inspection-Safety sampling technique-Safety audit-Safety survey-Incident recall technique-Job safety analysis-Damage control-Risk management. Involvement in safety: - Role of management-role of supervisors-role of workmen- role of unions-role of government

Module IV (12 Hours)

Occupational health and hygiene: - Functional units and activities of occupational health and hygiene-types of industrial hazards-physical, chemical, mechanical, electrical, social, biological, ergonomic and environmental hazards-factors impeding safety-house keeping-hearing conservation programme

Module V (12 Hours)

Industrial fire protection: - Fire chemistry-classification of fires-fire prevention activities-fire risks-fire load -contributing factors to industrial fires-fire detection-industrial fire protection systems.

Text Books:-

1.	Heinrich H.W, ‘Industrial accident prevention’, McGraw Hill Company, New York, 1980. 
 
Mahatma Gandhi University, Kottayam


2.	Frank P Lees, ‘Loss prevention in process industries’, Vol I, II, III, Butterworth, London, 1980. 
3.	R.P.Blake, “Industrial Safety”, Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi 

Reference books:-

1.	“Accident prevention manual for Industrial Operations”, National Safety Council, Chicago, 1989. 
2.	Brown D.B, “System Analysis and Design for safety”, Prentice Hall, New Jercy. 
 
