ME 010 706 L01: PLANT ENGINEERING AND MAINTENANCE


Teaching scheme	Credits: 4

2 hours lecture and 2 hour tutorial per week

Objectives

•	The course is designed to develop an understanding of maintenance tools and techniques in the new industrial world. 

Module 1 (12 hours)

Fundamentals of plant engineering - Plant facilities - Layout of facilities, basic amenities etc. Types of maintenance- breakdown, preventive, periodic or predictive, condition based maintenance- deterioration and failure analysis- planning, scheduling, and controlling of maintenance work- organization for maintenance.

Module 2 (12 hours)

Wear: Sliding wear tests – Archard wear equation – unlubricated wear of metals - wear regime maps for metals – mechanism of sliding wear of metals : plasticity dominated wear, Oxidative wear – lubricated wear of metals – fretting wear of metals – wear of ceramics and polymers.

Module 3 (12 hours)

Reliability: concept and definition-chance failure and wear out failure -application of stochastic model for reliability studies- reliability of series, parallel and stand by systems- estimation of parameters of failure distribution- maintainability and availability.
Replacement: causes of deterioration and obsolescence - sudden and gradual obsolescence and deterioration- economic analysis- MAPI method- simple problems.

Module 4 (12 hours)

Condition based maintenance using Vibration Signature, SOAP, ferrography, hot ferrography, Infra Red Camera, fluorescent dye, Particle Analyzers and other diagnostic techniques. Reliability Centered Maintenance- Total Productive Maintenance- Tero-technology and its influence on plant engineering and maintenance. Overall equipment effectiveness (OEE) – Reliability Availability and Maintainability analysis (RAM).

Module 5 (12 hours)

Safety management: fire protection and prevention - safety against mechanical hazards, chemical hazards- accident prevention program- Industrial noise - Pollution control- Waste disposal - Recycling of waste - Energy conservation, management and audit - legal provisions for safety in industry.

Text Books

1.	Collacott R.A., Mechanical fault Diagnosis and Condition Monitoring, Chapman and Hall Ltd. 
2.	Sushikumar Srivastava, Industrial Maintenance Management, S. Chand and Co. Ltd., New Delhi. 
 

Reference Books

1.	Rosaler R., Handbook of Plant Engineering, McGraw Hill. 
2.	Mobley K., Higgins L.R., Handbook of Maintenance Engineering, McGraw Hill. 
3.	Hutchings I. M., Trobology: friction and wear of engineering materials, Edward Arnold 
4.	Robinowicz Ernest, Friction and wear of materials, John Wiley 
