ME 010 701 Design of Machine Elements

(Common with AU010 701)

Teaching scheme	Credits: 4

2 hours lecture, 1 hour tutorial and 1 hour drawing per week

Objectives

To provide basic knowledge on the design considerations and methodology of various machine elements.

Module I (15 Hrs)

System design cycle - Different phases in design process - design factors and considerations - tolerances and fits - Hole basis & Shaft basis system - standardization - selection of materials - stress concentration - Methods to reduce stress concentration - theoretical stress concentration factor - theories of failure - Guest’s theory - Rankine’s theory - St. Venant’s theory - Haigh’s theory - Von Mises & Hencky theory - shock and impact loads - fatigue loading - endurance limit stress- Factors affecting endurance limit - Factor of safety - creep and thermal stresses.

Module II (15 Hrs)

Design of riveted joints- Failure of riveted joints and efficiency of joint -boiler and tank joints-structural joints, Cotter and Knuckle joints

Threaded joints - thread standards- thread nomenclature - stresses in screw threads- bolted joints preloading of bolts- eccentric loading- fatigue loading of bolts - Power screws.

Module III (15 Hrs)

Design of welded joints- Representation of welds - stresses in fillet and butt welds- design for static loads - bending and torsion in welded joints- eccentrically loaded welds - design of welds for variable loads.

Springs- stresses and deflection of helical springs with axial loading - curvature effect - resilience - design of spring for static and fatigue loading- surging- critical frequency- stress analysis and design of leaf springs..

Module IV (15 Hrs)

Shafts and axles design- stresses- causes of failure in shafts - design based on strength, rigidity and critical speed- design for static and fatigue loads- repeated loading- reversed bending-

Design of couplings - Rigid and flexible couplings - design of keys and pins.

Note: Any one of the following data book is only permitted for reference in the University examination

1.	Machine Design Data hand book by K. Lingaiah, Suma Publishers, Bangalore/ Tata Mc Graw Hill
2.	PSG Design Data,  DPV Printers, Coimbatore.
 

Text Books

1.  C.S, Sarma, Kamlesh Purohit, Design of Machine Elements, Prentice Hall of India Ltd , New Delhi

2.	M. F. Spotts, T. E. Shoup, Design of Machine Elements, Pearson Education. 
3.	V.B. Bhandari, Design of Machine Elements, McGraw Hill Book Company 

Reference Books

1.  J. E. Shigley, Mechanical Engineering Design, McGraw Hill Book Company
 
