ME010 508 Electrical & Electronics Lab

(Common with PE010 508 and AU010 508)

Teaching scheme	Credits: 2

3 hours practical per week

Objectives

•	To conduct various tests on Electrical Machines and to study their performance. 

•	To conduct various tests on practical electronic circuits 

PART A

1.	Study of 3-point and 4-point starters for D.C machines 

2.	OCC of self excited D.C machines – critical resistances of various speeds. Voltage built-up with a given field circuit resistance. Critical speed for a given field circuit resistance 

3.	OCC of separately excited D.C machines 

4.	Load test on shunt generator – deduce external, internal and armature reaction characteristics. 

5.	Load test on compound generator 

6.	Swinburne’s test on D.C machines 

7.	Brake test on D.C shunt motors and determination of characteristics. 

8.	Brake test on D.C series motors and determination of characteristics. 

9.	Brake test on D.C compound motors and determination of characteristics. 

10.	O.C and S.C tests on single phase transformers – calculation of performance using equivalent circuit – efficiency, regulation at unity, lagging and leading power factors. 

11.	Load test on single phase transformers. 

12.	Alternator regulation by emf and mmf methods 

13.	Study of starters for three phase induction motors 

14.	Load tests on three phase squirrel cage induction motors 

15.	Load tests on three phase slip ring induction motors 

16.	Load tests on single phase induction motors 


PART B

1.	Design and testing of clipping and clamping circuits 

2.	Design and testing of of RC integrator and differentiator circuits. 
 




Syllabus – B.Tech. Mechanical Engineering
 
Mahatma Gandhi University




3.	Design and testing of rectifier circuits – Half wave – Full wave (centre – tapped and bridge) circuits. Filter circuits. 

4.	Design and testing of RC coupled amplifier– frequency response. 

Sweep circuits

5. Design and Testing of RC phase-shift Oscillator

References

1.	Dr. P S Bimbra, Electrical Machinery, Khanna Publishers 
2.	R K Rajput, A text book of Electrical Machines, Laxmi publishers 
3.	A.P. Malvino, Electronic Principles– TMH 
4.	Floyd, Electronic Devices, Pearson Education, LPE 



Internal Continuous Assessment (Maximum Marks-50)

50%-Laboratory practical and record
30%- Test/s
20%- Regularity in the class






End Semester Examination (Maximum Marks-100)

70% -  Procedure, conducting experiment, results, tabulation, and inference

30% -  Viva voce
