ME 010 803  Production Engineering

Teaching scheme	Credits: 4

2 hours lecture and 2 hour tutorial per week

Module 1 (12 hours)

Theory of metal cutting: Scenario of manufacturing process – Deformation of metals, Schmid’s law (review only) – Performance and process parameters – single point cutting tool nomenclature - attributes of each tool nomenclature - attributes of feed and tool signature on surface roughness obtainable, role of surface roughness on crack initiation - Oblique and orthogonal cutting – Mechanism of metal removal - Primary and secondary deformation shear zones - Mechanism of chip formation, card model, types of chip, curling of chips, flow lines in a chip, BUE, chip breakers, chip thickness ratio – Mechanism of orthogonal cutting: Thin zone and thick zone, Merchant’s analysis – shear angle relationship, Lee and Shaffer`s relationship, simple problems – Friction process in metal cutting: nature of sliding friction, columb`s law, adhesion theory, ploughing, sub-layer flow – Empirical determination of force component.

Module 2 (12 hours)

Thermal aspects of machining: Source of heat, temperature distribution pattern in chip, shear plane and work piece, effect of speed, feed and depth of cut – tool temperature measurement - Tool materials: properties of tool material, Carbon steel, HSS ( classification, structure, composition, properties) - cemented Carbides (structure, properties), indexable inserts, coated WC, cermets – alumina (ceramic), sialon, cubic Boron Nitride (cBN), diamond, diamond coated tools – Tool wear: flank and crater wear – Tool wear mechanisms: adhesion, abrasion, diffusion and fatigue – Tool life, Taylor’s equation, applications - effect of rake angle, clearance angle, chip temperature and cutting time on tool life, simple problems - Tool wear criterion: allowable wear land etc - Economics of machining – machineability of Ti, Al, Cu alloys and machineability index – cutting force (quartz crystal dynamometer) - Cutting fluids: effect of specific heat on selection of fluids, functions, classifications, specific applications.


Module 3 (12 hours)

Powder Metallurgy: Need of P/M - Powder Production methods:- Atomization, electrolysis, Reduction of oxides, Carbonyls (Process parameters, characteristics of powder produced in each method) – Powder characteristics: properties of fine powder, size, size distribution, shape, compressibility, purity etc.- Mixing – Compaction:-techniques, pressure distribution, HIP & CIP, – Mechanism of sintering, driving force, solid and liquid phase sintering - Impregnation and Infiltration Advantages, disadvantages and specific applications of P/M.
Micromachining: Diamond turn mechanism, material removal mechanism-Magnetorheological nano-finishing process: - polishing fluid, characteristics of MRP fluid, MRF and MRAFF process.
 
Mahatma Gandhi University, Kottayam


Module 4 (12 hours)

Ceramic Structures and properties: - coordination number and radius rations - AX, AmXp, AmBmX p type crystal structures – imperfections in ceramics- phase diagrams of Al2O3 – Cr2O3 and MgO- Al2O3 only – mechanical properties – mechanisms of plastic deformation – ceramic application in heat engine, ceramic armor and electronic packaging.

Fundamentals of Composites: - particle reinforced composites – large particle composites - fiber reinforced composites: influence of fiber length, orientation and concentration-fiber phase – matrix phase.

Module 5 (12 hours)

Advanced production methods: Nontraditional machining: EDM, ECM, USM, EBM, LBM, IBM, Abrasive water jet machining (principle, process parameters, material removal mechanism, MRR, surface roughness, HAZ and applications) – Material addition process:- stereo-lithography, selective laser sintering, fused deposition modeling, laminated object manufacturing, laser engineered net-shaping, laser welding, LIGA process.

TEXT BOOKS:

1.	Armarego and Brown, The Machining of Metals, Prentice – Hall. 

2.	Bhattacharyya, Metal Cutting Theory and Practice, Central Publishers. Wiley 
3.	Paul. H. Black, Theory of Metal Cutting, McGraw Hill. 

REFERENCES BOOKS:

1.	ASM hand book Volume 16, Machining, ASM international, 1989 

2.	Boothroyd Geoffrey, Fundaments of Machining and Machine Tools, Marcel Dekker, 1990. 
3.	Brophy, Rose and Wulf, the Structure and Properties of Metals Vol.2, Wiley Eastern. 

4.	Dixon and Clayton, Powder Metallurgy for Engineers, Machinery Publishing Co. London. 

5.	Jain V.K., Introduction to Micromachining, Narosa publishers. 

6.	Juneja B.L. Fundamentals of metal cutting and machine tools, Wiley, 1987. 

7.	Komanduri R, Tool materials in Kirk Othmer Encyclopedia of chemical technology, 4th edition, volume 24, 390, Wiley, 1997. 

8.	Lal G.K., Introduction to Machining Science, New Age Publishers. 

9.	Machining date hand book, Volume 1 and 2, Machinability date center, Cincinnati, 1990. 

10.	Shaw Milton C, Metal Cutting Principles, CBS Publishers. 

11.	Trent M. Edward, Metal Cutting, Butterworth. 

12.	Venkatesh V.C. and H.Chandrasekaran, Experimental techniques in metal cutting, Prentice Hall, 1987. 
