ME010602: Heat and Mass Transfer

(Common with AU010 602)

Teaching scheme	Credits: 4

3 hours lecture and 1 hour tutorial per week

Objectives

•	To provide a useful foundation and basic knowledge of the subject required for innovative work and advanced studies. 
•	To motivate the students and to develop interest in the subject by providing information along with practical application of different formulae from an engineering point of view. 

Module I (12 hours)

Scope and application of heat transfer principles in engineering practice. Introduction to basic modes of heat transfer
Conduction: Fourier law-thermal conductivity of solids, liquids and gasses- factors affecting thermal conductivity-common conducting and insulating materials. General heat conduction equation in Cartesian, cylindrical and spherical co-ordinates- one dimensional steady state conduction with and without heat generation-conduction through homogeneous and composite surfaces-plane wall, cylinders and spheres-concept of thermal resistance-contact resistance-variable thermal conductivity-critical thickness of insulation-overall heat transfer coefficient-heat transfer through corners and edges-conduction shape factor.

Module II (12 hours)

Convection: Elementary ideas of hydrodynamic and thermal boundary layers-Newton’s law of cooling-factors affecting heat transfer coefficient in forced and natural (free) convection heat transfer-application of dimensional analysis to free and forced convection-significance of Prandtil number, Reynold’s number, Grashof number and Nusselt number. Forced convection: Laminar and turbulent flow heat transfer in a circular pipe- Laminar and turbulent flow heat transfer in flow over a flat plate-flow across a cylinder. Natural convection: Natural convection heat transfer from a plate kept vertical and horizontal- cylinder kept vertical and horizontal -description of natural convection heat transfer from enclosed spaces. (Problems limited to using important empirical relations available in data book)

Module III (12 hours)

Heat transfer from extended surfaces: Governing equation and boundary conditions-straight rectangular fin-pin fin of uniform cross sectional area-circumferential fin-fin effectiveness-fin efficiency-solving problems using data book.

Heat exchangers: General classification of heat exchangers according to type of energy transfer, according to flow arrangement and according to area to volume ratio-Log Mean Temperature Difference (LMTD) for parallel flow, counter flow and cross flow arrangements-calculation of heat exchanger size and flow rates from known temperatures. Effectiveness_NTU method of evaluation-solving problems using data book.

Module IV (12 hours)

Radiation: Nature of thermal radiation-definitions and concepts-monochromatic and total emissive power-absorptivity, reflectivity and transmissivity-definition of black, grey and real surfaces-concept of a black body-Plank’s law, Kirchoff’s law, Wein’s displacement law and Stefan-Boltzmann law-geometric factor (shape factor or configuration factor) of simple geometries. Heat exchange by radiation between black surfaces of equal, parallel and opposite black squares and discs- black rectangles perpendicular to each other having a common edge-heat exchange between infinite parallel planes of different emissivity-radiation shield ( no derivation )-simple derivations and simple problems using data book.
 



Syllabus - B.Tech. Mechanical Engineering.
 
Mahatma Gandhi University


Module V (12 hours)

Mass Transfer: Introduction to mass transfer-Fick’s law of diffusion-steady state mass diffusion of gasses and liquids through solids-convective mass transfer (elementary concepts and definitions)-analogy between heat and mass transfer-elementary problems.

Condensation and boiling: Laminar film condensation on a vertical plate and horizontal tubes. Pool boiling-different regimes of pool boiling-flow patterns in flow boiling in a vertical tube. Two dimensional steady state heat conduction-governing equation and boundary conditions-application of finite difference method in solving two dimensional steady state heat conduction through a rectangular slab (method of discretisation of nodal equations only)
Data Book:

1.	C. P. Kothandaraman, S. Subramanyan, Heat and Mass Transfer Data Book, 5th ed., New Age International Publishers. 

2.	A. V. Domkundwar, Dr. V. M. Domkundwar, Heat and Mass Transfer Data Book, 3rd ed., Danapat Rai & Co. 

References:


Text Books
1.	S. P. Sukhatme, A Text Book on Heat Transfer, 4th ed.,Universities Press, Hydrabad, 2005 
2.	S. K. Som, Introduction to Heat Transfer, PHI Learning pvt.ltd,New Delhi, 2008 
3.	P. K. Nag, Heat Transfer, 1st ed., Tata McGraw-Hill 

Reference Books

1.	Frank P. Incropera, David P. Dewitt, Fundementals of Heat and Mass Transfer, 5th ed., John Wiley & Sons 

2.	J. P. Holman, Heat Transfer, 9th ed., Tata McGraw Hill Education pvt.ltd., New Delhi, 2010 

3.	M. Necati Ozisick, Heat Transfer A Basic Approach, McGraw Hill Book Company 
4.	Frank Kreith, Mark S. Bohn, Principles of Heat Transfer, 5th ed , PWS Publishing Company 
5.	S. P. Venkateshan, A First Course in Heat Transfer, Ane Books, Chennai 
 

